
--- PAGE 1 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for
Seizure Video Analysis: A Review
David Ahmedt-Aristizabal1,2, Mohammad Ali Armin1, Zeeshan Hayder1,
Norberto Garcia-Cairasco3, Lars Petersson1, Clinton Fookes2,
Simon Denman2, and Aileen McGonigal4,5
1 Imaging and Computer Vision Group, CSIRO Data61, Australia
{david.ahmedtaristizabal; ali.armin; zeeshan.hayder;
lars.petersson}@csiro.au
2 SAIVT Laboratory, Queensland University of Technology, Australia
{c.fookes; s.denman}@qut.edu.au
3 Physiology Department and Neuroscience and Behavioral Sciences Department,
Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Brazil
ngcairas@usp.br
4 Neurosciences Centre, Mater Hospital, Australia
5 Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Australia
a.mcgonigal@uq.edu.au
Abstract. Seizureeventscanmanifestastransientdisruptionsinthecontrolof
movementswhichmaybeorganizedindistinctbehavioralsequences,accompanied
ornotbyotherobservablefeaturessuchasalteredfacialexpressions.Theanalysisof
theseclinicalsigns,referredtoassemiology,issubjecttoobservervariationswhen
specialists evaluate video-recorded events in the clinical setting. To enhance the
accuracyandconsistencyofevaluations,computer-aidedvideoanalysisofseizures
hasemergedasanaturalavenue.Inthefieldofmedicalapplications,deeplearning
andcomputervisionapproacheshavedrivensubstantialadvancements.Historically,
theseapproacheshavebeenusedfordiseasedetection,classification,andprediction
usingdiagnosticdata;however,therehasbeenlimitedexplorationoftheirapplica-
tioninevaluatingvideo-basedmotiondetectionintheclinicalepileptologysetting.
While vision-based technologies do not aim to replace clinical expertise, they can
significantly contribute to medical decision-making and patient care by providing
quantitativeevidenceanddecisionsupport.Behaviormonitoringtoolsofferseveral
advantagessuchasprovidingobjectiveinformation,detectingchallenging-to-observe
events,reducingdocumentationefforts,andextendingassessmentcapabilitiestoar-
eas with limited expertise. The main applications of these could be (1) improved
seizuredetectionmethods;(2)refinedsemiologyanalysisforpredictingseizuretype
andcerebrallocalization.Inthispaper,wedetailthefoundationtechnologiesused
invision-basedsystemsintheanalysisofseizurevideos,highlightingtheirsuccessin
semiologydetectionandanalysis,focusingonworkpublishedinthelast7years.We
systematicallypresentthesemethodsandindicatehowtheadoptionofdeeplearning
for the analysis of video recordings of seizures could be approached. Additionally,
weillustratehowexistingtechnologiescanbeinterconnectedthroughanintegrated
systemforvideo-basedsemiologyanalysis.Eachmodulecanbecustomizedandim-
proved by adapting more accurate and robust deep learning approaches as these
evolve.Finally,wediscusschallengesandresearchdirectionsforfuturestudies.
Keywords: Semiology, computational approaches, computer vision, epilepsy phe-
notyping.
1 Introduction
Seizure semiology involves the analysis of seizure clinical manifestations, which
may include stereotypical behavioral and motor changes, among them tonic,
clonic or complex motor patterns. The clinical expression of seizure represents
4202
raM
4
]VC.sc[
2v03901.2132:viXra
--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
the primary symptomatic challenge in epilepsy. Various semiologic manifesta-
tions of seizures are potentially measurable using video analysis: motor alter-
ations(e.g.asseeninautomaticbehaviors,hyperkineticseizures,ortonic-clonic
seizures); an abnormal lack of movement (typical of some seizures with promi-
nent loss of responsiveness to the environment); or an abrupt change in posture
that constitutes a risk factor for falls (e.g. in atonic seizures). Alongside electro-
physiological recordings and neuroimaging, the insights derived from semiology
are essential, particularly for patients resistant to drug treatment [35,218,12].
Seizure semiology, though a crucial data source for clinicians, poses substantial
methodological challenges for research, such as the selection of semiologic cate-
gories. A more profound understanding of semiologic categorization holds rele-
vance for refining seizure classification systems [152,159]. The interpretation of
video monitoring recordings, however, relies on clinical experience and can vary
between clinicians and across patients, especially when seizures involve complex
signs including hyperkinetic motor behavior [197].
Therefore automated quantification of semiology shows promise for extract-
ing more objective information from these recordings [4,122,105]. Quantified
analysis of seizures through video is desirable for its non-invasiveness and po-
tentially easy deployment, utilizing existing video hardware in various settings,
once clinically relevant algorithms have been developed. A main motivation in
developing this field has been the goal of accurate automated seizure detection,
because of the potential impact on morbidity, mortality and quality of life in
people with epilepsy [132].
Expanding on the interdisciplinary nature of this research, it is noteworthy
that although the characterization of behavior, in general, needs to be placed
in the context of biology and specifically of ethology, the systematic study
of behavior [221] has evolved into quantitative methods such as neuroethol-
ogy [77] and computational neuroethology [58]. These concepts, associated with
the study of the complexity of behavioral sequences such as those present in
human epilepsies [89,56,30,216], offer a unique perspective. The application of
theseapproachestoepilepsyresearchallowsforamoreintegratedunderstanding
of the complex interactions between neural circuits and behavior during seizure
activity.Moreover,theyprovideasolidfoundationfordevelopingcomputational
models that bridge the gap between clinical observation and automated quan-
tification.
Automated methods for seizure detection and classification may also help
improve patient monitoring, reducing the time and effort needed for screening
long-term video-EEG data in specialized Epilepsy monitoring units (EMUs).
Bettermethodsforautomatedvideo-basedseizuredetectioncanalsobeapplied
to home recording systems, once validated in a hospital setting [178]. Lastly, as
in other clinical fields, artificial-intelligence-enhanced diagnostic methods may
be trained to “see” patterns that clinicians do not reliably recognize, with the
potential for better prediction of cerebral localization from complex semiologic
features, such as those seen in hyperkinetic seizures. This last application in
particular is under-developed due to challenges such as the scarcity of datasets
--- PAGE 3 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 3
and the complexity of the natural clinical setting, which need to be addressed
in this field.
1.1 What is modern deep learning and computer vision?
The growing use of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning has sig-
nificantly influenced various technological domains, such as signal and human
motionanalysis.Machinelearning,asubsetofAI,encompassesdiversemethods
that enable systems to automatically learn patterns and make predictions from
data. The application of these learning methods, particularly in the domain of
video analysis, has gained prominence with the advent of modern deep learning
approaches. Deep learning, a subset of machine learning, employs many-layered
neuralnetworkstoautomaticallylearnhierarchicalfeaturesfromdata[137].No-
tably, the rise of deep learning has seen the field of video-based human action
analysis become a focal point within the field of computer vision and pattern
recognition, with recent technical advances allowing increasingly detailed anal-
yses of actions, gestures, and facial expressions [243].
Afoundationallearningparadigminmachinelearningissupervisedlearning,
whereanalgorithmistrainedonalabeleddataset,withinputdataandthecor-
responding desired outputs provided. From this, a model is trained to learn the
mapping between inputs and outputs. As such techniques are data-driven and
dependent on the quantity and quality of the provided data, there are several
critical challenges for medical applications including scarce annotation (too lit-
tle labelled data), complexity (a single type of instance to detect may appear in
many different forms), weak annotations (labels may be noise), and label spar-
sity (some classes have very few instances). To address these challenges, several
other learning paradigms have been proposed in the literature. Weakly super-
vised learning emerges as a strategy, leveraging partially annotated examples to
navigate the scarcity of labeled data. Self-supervised learning adopts a different
approach, where the data itself provides supervisory signals, aiding in learning
representations through proxy tasks. Additionally, reinforcement learning intro-
duces a concept where an agent learns optimal behavior by interacting within a
dynamic environment. Further background concepts in the domain of computer
vision and deep learning are discussed in Section 3.
1.2 Vision-based action recognition in health
Human action recognition, a key aspect of semiology analysis, aims to identify
different actions from sequences of observations across diverse environmental
conditions.Theapplicationsofsuchrecognitionmethodsdrivenbydeeplearning
andcomputervisionarewide-ranging,contributingtoadvancementsrelatingto
humanhealthandperformance.Applicationsincludeassessmentofhumandevel-
opment,optimizationofhumanperformance,neuromuscularrehabilitation,pre-
vention of musculoskeletal injury, gait analysis, and motor assessment [210,19].
Existing literature extensively explores the causal relationship between diseases
and abnormal body actions such as atypical head poses and movements, emo-
tions, eye movements, as well as upper and lower limb movements [57,223].
--- PAGE 4 ---
4 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
1.3 Vision-based seizure semiology analysis
There is an increasing interest in leveraging video analysis techniques for the
automated analysis of movements associated with motor stereotyped manifesta-
tions such as those from Parkinson’s disease, tremors, peripheral neuropathy,
Huntington’s chorea, ataxia, dystonia, and epilepsy [39,162,166,111]. Vision-
basedtechniques,inparticular,haveprovenvaluableinpatientmonitoring[195].
While general vision-based motion analyses excel in uncluttered settings, they
can be unreliable in noisy environments like epilepsy monitoring and intensive
careunits.Thesesettingsposeuniquechallenges,includingvaryinglightingcon-
ditions throughout recording sessions, environmental occlusions (e.g. bed blan-
kets, head wrapping, hospital gown), and interference from non-subject entities
(e.g. clinician, nurse, visitor) [219]. While current state-of-the-art deep learning
modelsexhibitpromiseinaddressingthesechallengesinepilepsy,theireffective-
nessisstillintheearlystages.Wecananticipatethatmoreadvancedvideo-based
automatic semiologic categorization will become possible as the field progresses.
Existing methods struggle to recognize subject-specific semiologic categories of
unseen behaviors, yielding modest performance. Achieving fine-grained semi-
ology recognition, crucial for distinguishing the stepwise progression of clinical
features,remainsachallenge.Inaddition,ensuringeffectiveexplainabilitytoun-
derstand model behavior beyond traditional performance indicators is essential,
with a particular focus on clinician usability. As these translations of research
progress, there is a need for research to facilitate the proper clinical adoption of
methods and to build trust between clinical experts and AI frameworks.
1.4 Scope of review and systematic review methodology
As the field is rapidly evolving and researchers are interested in understanding
the strengths and pitfalls of deep learning-based solutions for the analysis of
seizuresemiology,acomprehensivesurveyisrequiredthatprovidesinsightsfrom
existing studies and motivates researchers to address limitations and challenges
within this field. Conventional motion analysis of seizures, employing classical
markerlesscomputervisionmethods,wasreviewedbyPediaditisetal.[177]and
Abbasietal.[1].Amoredetailedexamination,consideringdata-drivensolutions
for motion capture and action detection, was presented by Ahmedt-Aristizabal
et al. [7]. Karacsony et al. [119] provided insights into advancements in video-
basedclinicalin-bedmonitoring,particularlywithinEMUs.Theseworksdiscuss
opportunitiestoaddresschallengesassociatedwith3Dmotioncapture,including
domaintransfer,occlusions,varyingviewpoints,anddealingwithlowresolution
footage. A recent study [132] outlined the anticipated workflow of a “complete
system” for video analysis of seizure event classification. However, this non-
technical discussion overlooked crucial stages.
Theapplicationofdeeplearningapproachestoseizurevideoanalysisisstillin
its nascent stages. The goal of this review is to provide an overview of advances
in the field, focusing on work published from 2017 and onwards (the date of
our previous review), and highlight ongoing challenges and future directions.
The following search string was used in the Google Scholar search engine as an
--- PAGE 5 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 5
initial search action: (human OR patient) AND (Epilepsy OR epileptic) AND
(videoORvisionORcomputervisionORactionrecognition)AND(motionOR
movement OR seizure OR semiology OR motor) AND (analysis OR detection
OR recognition OR classification) AND (automatic OR machine learning OR
deep learning OR artificial intelligence). Case reports and other deep learning
applications in Epilepsy including neuroimaging (e.g. MRI, fMRI) and brain
activity (e.g. EEG, iEEG) were excluded. Further papers were identified by
searchingpublicationsbythesameauthorsofinitiallyidentifiedrelevantpapers,
following references, and using the “Cited” function. The results were filtered
basedontheirtitleandabstract.Casestudiesreportedinthispaperareobtained
from various peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings, and open-access
repositories published in English. The total number of applications considered
in our survey is 35 manuscripts.
1.5 Contribution and organization
In contrast to other reviews that focus on theoretical aspects and applications
of action recognition in semiology, our manuscript makes novel contributions,
summarized as follows:
– We extend our 2016 review of vision-based approaches for semiology analy-
sis [7] by incorporating all relevant studies concerning the adoption of deep
learning techniques to enhance the automated detection and quantification
of seizures, and/or of individual seizure features captured by video record-
ings. All deep learning methods adopted by these works are described in
detail and categorized according to the motion analysis framework used.
– We introduce a multi-stream framework that connects different advance-
ments in automated semiology analysis, aiming to facilitate the adoption of
these technologies by clinical experts to provide diagnostic support.
– Our paper identifies several challenges specific to action recognition mod-
els in the context of seizure semiology based on video analysis, which have
not been comprehensively addressed in previous reviews. These challenges
cover areas such as motion capture of stereotyped movements and domain
adaptation, privacy preservation, interpretation of action models, open-set
action analysis, and time-evolving or fine-grained action recognition. Exist-
ing research efforts in AI and computer vision addressing these challenges
are highlighted.
This review is divided into five major sections. Section 2 elucidates concepts
and methods in quantifying behavior and behavioral sequences from a neurobi-
ological/neuroscience perspective. Then, the section explores the application of
computational neuroethology tools in evaluating these behavioral patterns. In
Section 3, we provide a technical overview of human action recognition (HAR)
and current approaches for vision-based seizure semiology analysis. Specifically,
Section3.3,introducesskeleton-basedHARapproaches,whileSection3.4focuses
onframe-basedHARmodels.InSection4,weintroducethecurrentapplications
of computer vision and deep learning techniques for semiology analysis. Details
regarding the existing approaches along with the computer vision techniques
--- PAGE 6 ---
6 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
are categorized according to the motion framework employed. Section 5 offers
guidance on incorporating existing approaches along with the computer vision
techniques they employ for clinical use through a multi-stream framework for
semiology analysis. Finally, in Section 6, we clarify limitations and offer new
perspectives on the current state of semiology-based seizure analysis.
2 Human movement analysis in the epilepsies: from
traditional clinical observation to quantitative and
computational neuroethology
The evolution of technology has played a pivotal role in shaping our under-
standing of human behavior, especially in the context of conditions such as
motor epilepsies. Computational tools have become integral in uncovering the
origins, triggers, and underlying mechanisms of epileptic manifestations, mark-
ingasignificantadvancementinneurosciencethroughdigitalandcomputational
technology.
In a recent review [87], we proposed transitioning from traditional clinical
observationstoquantitativesemiology,acknowledgingthechallengeofunknown
neural substrates in earlier eras. This paradigm shift aligns with the system-
atic evaluation of behavior in animals and humans within the science of ethol-
ogy [221], involving the creation of dictionaries for detailed behavior descrip-
tions. In the particular case of characterizing semiology, focusing on behavioral
features, pioneering studies discussed in [87] have found detailed associations,
distinguishing patients with epilepsy from similar clinical entities such as psy-
chogenic non-epileptic seizures (PNES) or cases with neuropsychiatric dysfunc-
tions.
In the progression of this research, the concept of neuroethology emerges
as the search for neural substrates of behaviors [77]. Expressions such as the
“Grammarofamovementsequence” havebeenutilizedbyauthorsinthefieldto
describe this pursuit. Laboratories initiated the development of ethograms and
behavioral glossaries [85]. These protocols involved annotating every behavior
anditsprobabilisticinteractionsdisplayedbyanimalswhenstimulated,modeling
various seizure types [88,81,41]. While the term was not explicitly used then,
these practices formed the foundation for what we now refer to as quantitative
human neuroethology.
Quantitativeneuroethologyofbehavioralsequencesservedasthenaturaltool
for studies, particularly in epileptic seizures. Initially conducted using animal
models [86,89], these studies were later extended to human patients with both
temporallobe[56,30]andfrontallobe[31]epilepticseizures.Forexample,behav-
ioral sequences were reconstructed as flow charts or graphs, with measurements
of complexity associated with the expression of the respective semiology [216].
Other researchers have proposed a paradigm shift, viewing semiology as being
dynamicallyproducedbyinterconnectedstructures,emphasizingtheroleofspe-
cificrhythmicinteractionsbetweenconnectedstructureswithinspecificnetworks
in clinical expression [159].
--- PAGE 7 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 7
An ongoing challenge is the expression of overlapping/redundant substrates
of associated interictal neuropsychiatric comorbidities in the behavioral aspects
of epilepsy. For example, studies with the concept of autobiographical memo-
ries [187] are vital, yet are often excluded in the criteria used to define epilepto-
genic regions.
Building upon these foundations, we believe that evaluating complex experi-
mental/human behavioral sequences in the context of epilepsy semiology can be
significantly enhanced with the deep learning and computer vision approaches
discussed in this review. Strengthening this proposal, Krakauer et al. [133] em-
phasized the importance of behavior studies in neuroscience, advocating for a
departure from contemporary reductionistic molecular/cellular biases.
Anotherchallengeandintriguingpathwayforadvancementsinhumanstudies
istheadaptationoftheconceptofquantitativeneuroethologytocomputational
neuroscience and modeling. Coined as computational neuroethology [58,240],
this concept focuses on automatically reconstructing complex behavioral frag-
ments, behaviors, or sequences through digital video recording and analysis of
individualsorgroupsofexperimentalanimals.Apioneeringprograminthisfield,
known as MoSeq2 [238], autonomously collects serial/sequential sets of behav-
iors. MoSeq2 utilizes a machine learning-based platform to identify behavioral
modules (“syllables”) from keypoint data without human supervision.
In conclusion, the fusion of quantitative neuroethology, computational neu-
roscience,andadvancedtechnologies,includingcomputervisionanddeeplearn-
ing,emergesasapowerfulapproachtounraveltheintricatesemiologyofepilep-
sies.Thisintegratedapproachnotonlycontributessignificantlytodiagnosisand
treatment strategies, but also signifies a crucial step forward in addressing the
challenges posed by this complex neurological disorder.
3 Computer vision for human motion analysis:
background
3.1 Overview of modern deep learning and human action
recognition
Deep learning, a subset of machine learning, enables the creation of computa-
tional architectures comprising multiple processing layers. These architectures
learn data representations with varying levels of abstraction through non-linear
transformations [28]. The primary distinction from traditional machine learning
lies in feature engineering. In deep learning algorithms, feature representations
are automatically derived from the training data rather than relying on human
assumptions as seen in traditional hand-crafted approaches [137]. This proves
particularlybeneficialinscenarioswhereunderstandingtherelationshipbetween
inputandoutputislimited[15].Deeplearningtechniqueshavebecomepredom-
inant in computer vision, outperforming traditional approaches across various
tasks, including human action recognition. Noteworthy deep neural network ar-
chitecturesincludeconvolutionalneuralnetworks(CNNs),recurrentneuralnet-
works (RNNs), graph neural networks (GNNs) and the Transformer model.
--- PAGE 8 ---
8 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
Within the broader area of computer vision, Human Action Recognition
(HAR)hasbecomeacompellingresearchfield.Thechallengesinactionrecogni-
tionextendbeyondthecomplexitiesofdefiningbodypartmotions,encompassing
various real-world issues like camera motion and dynamic background fluctua-
tions, as well as variations between subjects. HAR is designed to automatically
detect and comprehend actions executed by a human subject, leveraging infor-
mation captured through a camera. Video-based approaches not only analyze
spatial patterns within video frames/images but also learn temporal patterns.
Visible (RGB) data is the predominant data type for HAR, widely employed in
surveillanceandmonitoringsystems.Humanmotionanalysis,abroaderdomain,
spansapplicationsfromfundamentalmotiondetectiontointricatetaskssuchas
action recognition, classification, and prediction. For an in-depth exploration of
thisfield,readersareencouragedtorefertosurveymanuscripts[112,26,174,211].
Deeplearningmethodsmayalsobetrainedindifferentways.Inasupervised
learning paradigm, training occurs offline as the machine learning processes use
the labeled data to learn a mapping from the input to the output, and thus
predictoutputforunforeseendata.However,thescarcityoflabeledclinicaldata
and challenges in acquiring additional data make efficient data utilization cru-
cial. To overcome the limitations posed by small datasets, HAR architectures
rely on transfer learning. Networks are pre-trained on large-scale datasets [92]
whichallowsthearchitecturetolearnarobustgeneralrepresentation,whichcan
thenbeappliedtoextractfeaturesandlearnarepresentationspecificallyforthe
target domain such as seizure video recordings. However, the generalizability
of trained classifiers in subject-independent classification settings is hindered by
theconsiderablevariationinbehavioracrossdifferentsubjects.Aresearchdirec-
tion with significant potential is self-supervised learning. In scenarios where no
classlabelsareavailable,aneffectiverepresentationcouldpotentiallybelearned
through an end-to-end method entirely in an unsupervised manner, utilizing a
large volume of unlabeled data.
3.2 Overview of vision-based seizure semiology analysis
Seizures characterized by motor manifestations are analyzed and can be auto-
matically classified based on the specific type of visible (mainly motor) symp-
tomatology.Someseizuresaredefinedbyunnaturalelementarymovements,such
as those seen in myoclonic, clonic, tonic, versive, and tonic-clonic seizures [80].
Themachine-basedclassificationdependsonfactorssuchasthedurationofmus-
cle contraction, rhythmicity of movement repetition, and the muscle groups or
bodysegmentsinvolved(e.g.asymmetricposture,flexionoftheneck,abduction
of both arms, and turning of eyes and head to one side). In contrast, more com-
plex motor manifestations may sometimes seem naturalistic, and usually com-
prise action patterns involving movements with more complex temporal organi-
zationinvolvingdifferentbodysegments(e.g.manualandoralautomatismssuch
as chewing, swallowing, smacking the lips and fumbling with clothes) [169,33].
Some existing research on automated quantification of semiology is based
on the hypothesis that seizures with similar motor symptoms may involve neu-
--- PAGE 9 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 9
Fig.1:Overviewofdeeplearningapplicationsforsemiologyanalysis.A.Motion
capture and skeleton-based human action recognition. B. Frame-based human
action recognition. C. Feature representations of the motion exhibited by a pa-
tient during a seizure, which is used to identify if new data samples are similar
to known semiologies, enabling the categorization of Epilepsy types.
ronal activity within the same specific brain networks, and thus could be suf-
ficient to detect and categorize patients with specific types and brain localiza-
tions of epilepsy [132]. Vision-based approaches for semiology highlight the sig-
nificance of analyzing spatio-temporal information during seizures (i.e. behav-
ioral sequences), employing action recognition methodologies. In this domain,
the discriminative power of deep learning architectures is exploited for marker-
lessmotioncapture(MoCap)ofbodyregionsforisolatedclinicalmanifestations
from the body, head, face, and hands. Furthermore, deep learning is integral to
seizure detection (identifying epileptic events within a continuous data stream)
and seizure classification (categorizing seizures or seizure disorders).
Deep learning models play a crucial role in advancing motion capture tech-
nologies, particularly for detecting regions of interest (ROI). These ROIs may
encapsulateentitieslikepatients,heads,faces,orhands.Yetthesetechniquesgo
beyond mere object identification and localization, inferring facial landmarks,
body keypoints, and hand landmarks from video data. While seizures, strictly
speaking,maynotbecategorizedasactions,HARmodelsaredesignedtoencode
robustrepresentationsofhumanmotionthatmayproverelevantforseizurechar-
acterization.Thesemethodsarecommonlystructuredtoclassifyhumanactions
by aggregating predictions for snippets sampled from short clips. Traditionally,
a subject-level prediction is obtained by averaging all predictions made at the
snippet level.
In the pre-deep learning era, various hand-crafted feature-based approaches,
suchasspace-timevolume-basedmethods,space-timeinterestpoint-basedmeth-
ods, and trajectory-based methods, were employed for RGB video-based detec-
tionandHAR.However,withtheadventofdeeplearning,contemporaryresearch
insemiologyhasshiftedtotheadoptionofdifferenttypesofdeeplearningframe-
works.Theseframeworksfallintotwocategories,skeleton-basedandframe-based
HAR. A visual representation of these frameworks is provided in Figure 1. The
first,skeleton-basedHAR,focusesondetectingsemantickeypointsormovement
direction/intensity initially. Subsequently, quantitative kinematic and spectral
--- PAGE 10 ---
10 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
parametersarecomputedtodetect/classifyEpilepsytypeswithclassicalmachine
learningordeeplearningmethods.Here,skeletoninformationreferstobody,fa-
cial, or hand landmarks. These approaches have been utilized by [10,9,110] (See
Figure 1A). The second framework, a frame-based HAR, captures the dynamic
variation of the body’s physical appearance from sequences of images. This ap-
proach considers both the presence of specific movements of interest (MOI) and
their dynamics and biomechanical characteristics (e.g. speed/acceleration pat-
terns, movement amplitude). Works including [8,120,182,253,104] are example
of this approach (See Figure 1B). Seizure semiology encompasses the study of
thestepwise/temporalprogressionofaconstellationofsignsthatarereflectiveof
dynamicchangeswithinconnectedneuronalnetworks.Thus,investigatingasin-
gleclinicalsigninisolationisgenerallylessinformativethanconsideringallsigns
jointly and in the context of their usual temporal relationship. As such, multi-
streamframeworkshavebeenproposed,capableofjointlyquantifyingsemiologic
features from different body locations through fusion or hierarchical approaches
(e.g. an ensemble model learning from pose and face skeleton-based streams).
Hybrid networks, which fuse the benefits of both skeleton-based and frame-
based approaches for seizure detection and classification, have also been pro-
posed in [4,103,105]. Characteristic combinations of clinical features of different
seizure types can be demonstrated to be associated with seizures arising from
different brain regions at group level, although predictive power and degree of
specificity/sensitivity of these varies. For some types of epilepsy, it is the motor
features of the seizures that seem to most strongly predict brain localization;
this has been demonstrated at the sub-lobar level in frontal lobe epilepsy [35].
Such seizure types with prominent and potentially discriminating motor pat-
terns lend themselves well to analysis using computer vision-based approaches.
A visual example of these motions is illustrated in Figure 1C. The utilization of
these feature representations contributes to the development of robust models
capable of discerning and categorizing diverse seizure types. Further details on
recent case studies of vision-based approaches in Epilepsy are discussed in Sec-
tion 4. The following subsections provide details of the specific techniques used
by each human action recognition framework.
3.3 Skeleton-based human action recognition
In skeleton-based action recognition, the primary focus is on explicitly track-
ing and analyzing the movement and positions of skeletal joints from the body,
face, or hands, that inherently contain spatio-temporal information. Skeleton
data offers numerous advantages for HAR including a simple yet informative
representation, scale invariance, and robustness to variations in clothing tex-
tures and backgrounds. These approaches are often fast since the human pose
representation is very compact. However, they lack appearance and detailed
shapeinformationand theunderlying skeletonrepresentation canbeconsidered
anoisyrepresentation[211].Anotherdrawbackisthepropagationoferrorsfrom
themotioncapturetotheactionrecognitionstage,afactorhighlydependenton
the quality of the spatio-temporal feature extraction of the initial stage. Joint
--- PAGE 11 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 11
Fig.2:Overviewofskeleton-basedhumanactionrecognition.A.Motioncapture:
Includes2D/3Dlandmarksand3Dmeshestimationforthebody,faceandhands.
B.Spatio-temporalrepresentation:depictsthemotionofeachkeypointfromthe
body, face, or hands. RNN-based, CNN-based, GNN-based, and Transformer-
based methods are all commonly used with this type of approach.
information is vulnerable to conditions where joint estimation is performed er-
roneously, which is not uncommon due to the frequent occlusions that occur in
seizure videos. Figure 2 illustrates these stages.
3.3.1 Markerless motion capture: keypoint detection Human pose es-
timation: Human pose estimation involves localizing anatomical keypoints, and
is widely studied in computer vision and has broad applications (e.g. motion
analysis, healthcare, virtual reality). Although camera-based methods for hu-
man pose estimation have been studied extensively, in-bed pose analysis comes
with specific challenges including joints being occluded, blur, and low-light con-
ditions. Traditional pose estimation models are broadly categorized into two
groups: in the first approach, a human bounding box is initially detected, and
then keypoints indicating joint locations for each person are estimated (known
as top-down methods, e.g. AlphaPose [69], ViTPose [247]). This can lead to er-
rorsasthepredictedboundingboxinthefirststepmaynotincludetherequired
joints for the second step. In the second approach, all keypoints are detected
in the first stage and they are assigned to each person in an image in a second
stage (bottom-up methods, or box-free human detection, e.g. OpenPose [37]).
Human pose estimation has also been investigated in 3D space to predict the
locations of body joints. For instance, a 3D human pose estimation algorithm
was developed by taking into account spatial and temporal information [215].
In addition to estimating the 3D pose, some methods also recover a 3D human
mesh from images or videos [150,176]. This field has attracted much interest in
recentyearssinceitisusedtoprovideextensive3Dstructureinformationrelated
to the human body.
Facial landmark estimation: Facial information plays a crucial role in semiology
analysis. Facial landmark estimators are designed to detect the location of fidu-
cial points, such as the eyes, nose, mouth, or chin, from a face image or video.
Facial landmarks can be detected in 2D or 3D space. 2D facial landmark detec-
tionandalignmentviacascadedregressionandCNN-basedmethodshaveshown
considerable performance [251]. However, these methods often regress only the
--- PAGE 12 ---
12 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
visible points and encounter challenges with large-pose changes and occlusions.
To partially address these challenges, facial landmarks can be inferred jointly
withtheirocclusionprobabilityandtheoverallheadpose[147].3D-basedmeth-
ods encompass a wide range of views using a 3D model, which is robust to
illumination and pose variations [36,43]. In addition to these methods, with ad-
vancementsinneuralrenderingandgenerativevisualmodels,syntheticdatahas
gained popularity in facial landmark detection [260]. The application of more
advanced facial landmark methods, especially those demonstrating high perfor-
mance in handling occlusion and large pose changes, can be a game-changer in
extracting richer facial information for semiology analysis. For further informa-
tion about 2D/3D facial landmarks, consult [232,34,198,160].
Hand landmark estimation: Hand pose estimation refers to methods used to
detect hand landmarks or keypoints. This is of interest given the rich and sub-
tle repertoire of abnormal hand postures and movements observed in epileptic
seizures,inconjunctionwiththerapidtechnicalprogressinautomatedmethods
forhanddetectioninvideo[78,209].Methodsthatcanlocalizehandjointsshare
severalpropertieswithhumanbodyposeestimation,andmanyapproachespro-
posed for the human body can be adapted for hand pose estimation. Similar
to body pose, hand pose can also be estimated in 2D [201,234] or 3D [173,50]
space. Image generation and synthetic data have also become popular in hand
poseestimation.Examplesofrecentlyintroducedsyntheticdataare [126],which
includesmulti-viewhanddata,and[142],whichfeatures1millionphoto-realistic
imagesofhandsinteractingwithvariousobjects,backgrounds,andtextures.For
more information about 2D/3D or hybrid hand pose models, refer to [49,170].
3.3.2 Actionrecognitionmodels(skeleton-basedHAR) Skeleton-based
action recognition centers on extracting meaningful action dynamics from the
detected keypoints or dense 3D representations. In the early stages of this field,
many attempts encoded all human body joint coordinates in each frame into
a feature vector for pattern learning [229]. Once a representation of the body
positionhasbeenchosen,variousactionrecognitionmodelscomeintoplay,each
with its unique approach. These are detailed below.
RNN-based methods: RNN-based methods analyze the vector sequences of joint
positions over time. The position of each joint in the human body as it moves
over time can be expressed as a vector. The main idea of the RNN is to use a
memory-based deeplearning module tostore informationfrom previous compu-
tationalstepsattimet−1tomakethemostaccuratepredictionforthecurrent
step at time t. Several studies utilize human pose over time in a recurrent neu-
ral network such as Gate Recurrent Unit (GRUs), Long-Short Term Memory
(LSTM) [255], and independently recurrent neural network (IndRNNs) [145]
and infer the action of interest at every time-step. These approaches are shown
to be fast and effective for skeleton-based HAR.
CNN-basedmethods: ThisapproachutilizestheadvantagesofCNN-basedobject
recognition in a 2D space (image space). It maps a 3D representation of the 3D
humanskeletonsintoa2Darray(possiblycapturingthespatialrelationshipsbe-
--- PAGE 13 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 13
tweentheskeletonjoints)tolearnspatio-temporalskeletonfeatures.Examplesof
recentworksusingCNN-basedspatio-temporalapproachesareCNNfusion[144],
and PoseConv3D [65]. A CNN fusion model for skeletal action recognition is
proposedin[144],whichusesspatio-temporalinformationincludingskeletaltra-
jectory shape images as well as skeletal pose image sequences. PoseConv3D [65]
usedthe3D-CNNtocapturethespatio-temporaldynamicsofskeletonsequences;
wheretheinputtothe3D-CNNbackboneare3Dheatmapvolumes.Thepseudo
heatmaps for joints and limbs that are generated provide rich information as in-
puts for 3D-CNNs. More information about convolutional neural network-based
action can be found in [254].
GNN-based methods: Early approaches to skeleton-based HAR employed RNNs
andCNNs,butrecentadvancementshavesurpassedthemwiththeintroduction
of Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). Leveraging the expressive power of
graph structures, GCNs efficiently represent non-Euclidean data, allowing them
to capture both spatial (intra-frame) and temporal (inter-frame) information.
These learning models have been adopted for various tasks including skeleton-
based human action recognition [199,172] and facial landmark-based emotion
recognition [168]. The spatio-temporal graph (ST-GCN) [250], the first work
utilizingGCNsforHAR,isconstructedsuchthatthegraphnodesrepresentthe
joint and the edges encode natural connections in both human body and time.
Multiple layers of spatio-temporal graph convolution operations are applied to
the input data, generating higher-level feature maps on the graph, subsequently
classifying the input into the corresponding action category. Followed by the
success of ST-GCN, actional-structural graphs have been proposed to capture
both actional links and structural links over time [143]. Another work involves
the use of a graph network to perform spatial reasoning and temporal stack
learning (SR-TSL) for skeleton-based HAR, comprising a spatial reasoning net-
work (SRN) and a temporal stack learning network (TSLN) [200]. More recent
approaches include ST-GCN++ [64] and Efficient GCN [207].
Transformer-basedmethods: Visiontransformersareemergingasapowerfultool
to solve computer vision problems. Recent techniques have also proven the ef-
ficacy of transformers beyond the image domain, extending to diverse video-
related tasks, including action recognition [17].
Thearchitectureoftransformers,featuringaself-attentionmechanism,proves
useful for estimating temporal relationships and motion dynamics encoded in
joint positions. Some examples of these approaches include PoseConv3D [65],
SkeletonMAE [244] and InfoGCN++ [51]. PoseConv3D [65] addresses limita-
tionsincurrentSkeleton-basedHumanActivityRecognition(HAR)methodsby
combining 3D CNN and a transformer-based approach for feature extraction,
modeling temporal dependencies, and handling the sparsity of skeleton data.
SkeletonMAE [244] focuses on capturing structural information and temporal
dependenciesinskeletondatabyrepresentingitasagraph.Itintroducesmasked
autoencoders to learn meaningful representations by reconstructing the original
skeleton sequences with masked nodes. Furthermore, InfoGCN++ [51], lever-
ages graph convolutional networks (GCNs) as part of the transformer network
--- PAGE 14 ---
14 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
Fig.3: Overview of frame-based human action recognition. A. Motion capture:
Regionofinterestdetectionsuchasthebody,face,orhands.B.Spatio-temporal
representationsarelearnedfromsequentialframes.CNN-RNN-based,3D-CNN-
based and Transformer-based methods are all commonly used with this type of
approach.
to learn informative representations by predicting future frames in the skeleton
sequence. These transformer-based methods incorporate temporal information
through a joint learning strategy, resulting in improved performance in action
recognition tasks.
3.4 Frame-based HAR modality
In frame-based action recognition, the focus is on analyzing regions or patches
within sequences of images. This approach does not rely on explicit skeletal
data but rather on the visual information captured in the frames, including the
spatial layout and temporal changes in these regions [211]. This framework is
illustrated in Figure 3. As these approaches directly operate on RGB videos,
there is a possibility of privacy leakage of sensitive patient data from videos.
Moreover, obtaining consent from patients to share their raw RGB video data
for inter-cohort validation studies and developing approaches that generalize to
large populations becomes challenging.
3.4.1 Markerless motion capture: region of interest detection Object
detection is a challenging problem that requires the solution to two main tasks:
recognition and localization. Recent years have witnessed remarkable perfor-
mance gains in object detection, attributable to advancements in deep convolu-
tional neural networks. These detectors have been useful for the identification
of key areas in each video such as the patient’s body, head, face, mouth, and
hands. Object detectors can be categorized as anchor-based, anchor-free and
Transformer-based [115,48].Thecoreideaofanchor-basedmodelsistointroduce
aconstantsetofboundingboxes,referredtoasanchors,whichcanbeviewedas
a set of pre-defined proposals for bounding box regression (methods such as the
RCNNseries,YOLOseries,andSDDseriesofdetectors,e.g.MaskR-CNN[98],
Scaled-YOLOv4[228],PP-YOLOv2[108]).Anchor-freemethodsoffersignificant
--- PAGE 15 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 15
promise to cope with extreme variations in object scales and aspect ratios [124].
Suchapproaches,forexample,canperformobjectboundingboxregressionbased
on anchor points instead of boxes (i.e. the object detection is reformulated as a
keypoint localization problem) (key-point-based and anchor-point-based meth-
ods, e.g. YOLOX [90], PP-YOLOE [246]). Object detection algorithms based
on the Transformer architecture can capture long-range dependencies over the
object and easily extract useful global information, which has gradually become
a hot research direction in this field (methods include the DETR series and
ViT series, e.g. DETR [38], AnchorDETR [235], ViT-FRCNN [25], Swin Trans-
former [149], VitDet [146]). Additional details on object detection algorithms
can be found in [258,48].
3.4.2 Action recognition models (frame-based HAR) Frame-based hu-
man action recognition involves capturing both spatial and temporal features
from video sequences to understand and classify human actions. This task can
beexecutedineitheratwo-stageorone-stageconfiguration.Inatwo-stagesetup,
spatialfeaturesareextractedfromeachframe,followedbythesubsequentmod-
eling of temporal dependencies across the frames. Conversely, in a one-stage
configuration, the unified architecture processes all input video frames jointly,
capturing both spatial and temporal features. The subsequent descriptions pro-
vide more insight into these action recognition models.
CNN-RNNbasedmethods: Severalvideo-baseddiscreteactionrecognitionmeth-
ods, such as [202], have employed a CNN-RNN framework to leverage both spa-
tial and temporal information. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are widely
usedtoanalyzetemporaldatathroughtherecurrentconnectionsintheirhidden
layers, and in CNN-RNN frameworks they simply operate over a sequence of
embeddings extracted frame-wise with a CNN. An example of this approach is
introduced in [227], where a two-stream convolutional network with long-short-
term spatio-temporal features is utilized for human action recognition.
3D-CNN-basedmethods: Manyresearchershaveextended2DCNNsto3Dstruc-
tures to simultaneously model the spatial and temporal information in videos
whichiscrucialforHAR.Asoneoftheearliestworks,Jietal.[113]introduceda
novelapproachtoaddressthelimitationsoftraditional2DCNNsforrecognizing
humanactionsinvideos.Byincorporatingthetemporaldimension,theproposed
3DCNNmodelcapturesmotioninformationandimprovestheaccuracyofaction
recognition. Wang et al. [233] integrated a two-stream 3D CNN with an LSTM
model to capture long-range temporal dependencies. While there are many ex-
amples of 3D-CNNs, the temporal structures of 3D convolutional networks are
highly inflexible. These networks only accept a set number of frames as input,
forexample,Jietal.[113]limitsittojust7frames.Furthermore,settinganap-
propriatetemporalspanischallenginggiventhatmacromovementsfordifferent
actions and different body parts have different speeds and durations.
Transformer-based methods: Aspreviouslynoted,3DCNNapproacheshavesev-
eral drawbacks that limit their applicability when dealing with complex actions
ofvariabledurations.Transformer-basedapproachesbridgethisgapbyproviding
--- PAGE 16 ---
16 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
auniquesolution.TheTransformermodelcanprocesssequentialdatainparallel
by introducing positional embeddings. An early transformer-based method [93],
Video Action Transformer Network (VATN), consists of two main components:
theSpatialTransformerandtheTemporalTransformer.Thelearnedtransform-
ers allow the network to selectively attend to important features, resulting in
improvedactionrecognitionaccuracy.Recently,theMTV[249]frameworkcom-
bines multiple views of a video sequence to capture comprehensive spatial and
temporal information. This introduces a fusion mechanism that combines the
outputs of the transformers. Additionally, [75] introduces a framework that
utilizes masked auto-encoders to capture spatial and temporal dependencies in
video data. This approach offers a valuable mechanism for leveraging masked
auto-encoders with video data to enhance the understanding and recognition
of intricate video patterns. We refer keen readers to [100] and [224] for a more
detailed analysis of action recognition methods.
4 Case studies of vision-based approaches in Epilepsy
For over a decade, research efforts have been dedicated to exploiting the bene-
fits of computer vision for seizure semiology analysis [177,7]. Recent approaches
leveragethesynergyofcomputervisionanddeeplearningtechniquesformotion
detection and action recognition. Compared to traditional machine learning ap-
proaches,deeplearningtechniquesstandoutfortheircapacitytoautonomously
learn spatio-temporal feature representations from data, obviating the need for
hand-designedfeatures[7].Whilethenaturalinclinationtoemploydeeplearning
inseizurevideoanalysisisevident,studiesinthisdomainremainrelativelyscarce
compared to those focused on neuroimaging and neuronal activity [193,140]. An
overview of existing vision-based applications for seizure video analysis is de-
tailedinTable1.Inadditiontovideo-basedapproaches,therehavebeencontri-
butions focused on numerical representations of seizure descriptors, and textual
descriptionsdetailingthesemiologyofseizures.Thesenumericalrepresentations,
when combined with AI, show promise in localizing the origin of seizures [164].
However, a limitation persists, as the text and description remain subjective to
expert interpretation.
4.1 Applications and model frameworks
Initialstudieshaveprimarilyemployedhand-designedfeaturesbasedonmotion-
strength, motion-trajectory, or average differential luminance signals in video
segments to develop automated seizure detection systems. For example, hand-
crafted features are extracted based on patient motion trajectories by attach-
ing infrared reflective markers to specific body key points and by exploiting
RGB-Dsensors(e.g.theMicrosoftKinectcamera)todistinguishTemporalLobe
Epilepsy(TLE)andExtratemporalLobeEpilepsy(ETLE)[54].Aghaeietal.[3]
proposed a multimodal seizure detection approach to detect nocturnal convul-
sive seizures by combining hand-crafted features from video and EEG signals,
--- PAGE 17 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 17
Table1:Chronologicalbenchmarkofvision-basedapproachesforsemiologyanal-
ysis (marker-free systems). For pre-2016 works, please refer to our previous re-
view paper [7].
Signal Application(Classes) Target Authors YearDataset(Locationrecorded)
RGB Detection(FLE,TLE) Face Houetal.[102] 2023Private(TaipeiVeteransGeneralHospital,Taipei)
RGB∗ EarlyDetection(TCSs) Body Mehtaetal.[161] 2023Private(Hospital-basedVideoEEGMonitoring,notprovided)+GESTURES[182]
RGB Classification(SHE,DOA) Body Moroetal.[165] 2023Private(SleepMedicineCenter,NiguardaHospital,Italy)
RGB∗ Classification(GTCSs,TCS) Body Garçãoetal.[84] 2023Private(HospitaldeSantaMaria(HSM)andHospitaldeEgasMoniz,Portugal)
RGB Detection(Epilepticspasms) Body Eguchietal.[66] 2023Private(HokkaidoUniversityHospital,Japan)
RGB Classification(Seizures⋆)§ Body Ojanenetal.[171] 2023Private(TampereUniversityHospital,Finland)
RGB+IR Detection(Nocturnalseizures)§ Body Lennardetal.[139] 2023Private(Cornwall,Uk)
RGB+IR Detection(ES⋆,PNES)§ Body Raietal.[185] 2023Private(DanishEpilepsyCenterandAarhusUniversityHospital,Denmark)
RGB Detection(Nocturnalseizures⋆)§ Body Peltolaetal.[178] 2022Private(DanishEpilepsyCenterandAarhusUniversityHospital,Denmark)
RGB+IR Detection(NocturnalTCSs)§ Body ArmandLarsenetal.[16] 2022Private(DanishEpilepsyCenterandAarhusUniversityHospital,Denmark)
RGB Classification(ES,PNES) Body/Face Houetal.[104] 2022Private(TimoneUniversityHospital,France)
RGB Classification(Dystonia,Emotion) Body/Face Houetal.[105] 2022Private(TimoneUniversityHospital,France)
IR+RGB-DClassification(FLE,TLE,NS) Body Karácsonyetal.[122] 2022Private-3Dvideo-EEG(UniversityofMunich,Germany)
RGB Classification(Gelastic,Dacrystic,NS) Face Pothulaetal.[184] 2022Customised(PublicYoutubevideos)
RGB Detection(RolandicEpilepsy) Body Wuetal.[245] 2022Private(Children’sHospital,ZhejiangUniversitySchoolofMedicine,China)
RGB Classification(ES,PNES) Body/Face Houetal.[103] 2021Private(TimoneUniversityHospital,France)
RGB Classification(FOS,TCS) Body Pérez-Garcíaetal.[182] 2021GESTURES(NationalHospitalforNeurologyandNeurosurgery,UK)
RGB Detection(GTCS) Body Yangetal.[253] 2021Private(BostonChildren’sHospital,US)
RGB Detection(Myoclonicjerks‡) Body Hyppönenetal.[110] 2020Private(KuopioEpilepsyCenterHelsinki,Finland)
IR Classification(TLE,FLE) Body Karácsonyetal.[120] 2020Private-3Dvideo-EEG[54,53](UniversityofMunich,Germany)
RGB∗ Detection(Nocturnalseizures⋆) Body vanWestrhenenetal.[239,118]2020Private(Childrenmonitoredintheirhomeorinresidentialcare)
RGB SemiologyEvolution(PE) Body/Face Houetal.[106] 2020Private(TimoneUniversityHospital,France)
IR+RGB-DClassification(TLE,ETLE) Body Maiaetal.[158] 2019Private-3DVideo-EEG[54,53](UniversityofMunich,Germany)
RGB SemiologyEvolution(MTLE,ETLE) Face/Hands Ahmedt-Aristizabaletal.[11] 2019Private(MaterHospitalNeuroscienceCentre,Australia)
RGB Classification(MTLE,ETLE) Face(Mouth) Ahmedt-Aristizabaletal.[9] 2019Private(MaterHospitalNeuroscienceCentre,Australia)
RGB DetectionAberrantbehavior(MTLE,ETLE)Body Ahmedt-Aristizabaletal.[6] 2019Private(MaterHospitalNeuroscienceCentre,Australia)
RGB Classification(MTLE,ETLE,FND) Body Ahmedt-Aristizabaletal.[4] 2019Private(MaterHospitalNeuroscienceCentre,Australia)
RGB Classification(MTLE/ETLE) Hands Pemasirietal.[180] 2019Private(MaterHospitalNeuroscienceCentre,Australia)
RGB Detection(Unclear) Body Fangetal.[70] 2018Informationnotprovided
RGB Classification(MTLE/ETLE) Body/Face/HandsAhmedt-Aristizabaletal.[5] 2018Private(MaterHospitalNeuroscienceCentre,Australia)
RGB Classification(MTLE/ETLE) Body/Face Ahmedt-Aristizabaletal.[10] 2018Private(MaterHospitalNeuroscienceCentre,Australia)
RGB Detection(MTLE) Face Ahmedt-Aristizabaletal.[8] 2018Private(MaterHospitalNeuroscienceCentre,Australia)
RGB∗ Detection(Nocturnalseizures⋆) Body Geertsemaetal.[91,118] 2018Private(UniversityMedicalCenterUtrecht,Netherlands)
IR+RGB-DDetection(†) Body Achillesetal.[2] 2018Private(UniversityofMunich,Germany)
RGB Detection(Nocturnalconvulsive) Body Aghaeietal.[3] 2017Private(ChDetecildren’sHospitalMedicalCenterofTehran,Iran)
RGB-D Classification(TLE/ETLE) UpperLimbs/HeadCunhaetal.[54] 2016Private-3DVideo-EEG(UniversityofMunich,Germany)
RedGreenBlue(RGB);RedGreenBlue-Depth(RGB-D);Infrared(IR);TemporalLobeEpilepsy(TLE);ExtratemporalLobeEpilepsy(ETLE);MesialTemporalLobeEpilepsy(MTLE);Functional
neurologicaldisorders(FND);PrefrontalEpilepsy(PE);FocalOnsetSeizure(FOS);Tonic-clonicseizure(TCS);PsychogenicNon-EpilepticSeizure(PNES);Sleep-relatedhypermotorEpilepsy(SHE);
Disordersofarousal(DOA);Generalizedtonic-clonicseizure(GTCS);EpilepticSeizures(ES);NonSeizure(NS);∗vector-basedrepresentationofbodymovements(e.g.OpticalFlow)⋆Tonic-clonic,
tonic,hyperkineticseizures;†clonic,tonic,automotorseizures;‡predictionunifiedmyoclonusratingscale(UMRS);§CE-markedNelli®hybridsystemproducedbyNeuroEventslaboratory.
achieving a higher accuracy than using either modality alone. Similarly, spatio-
temporal interest points are extracted from video sequences to construct a his-
togram of word frequency features for video representation to detect Rolandic
Epilepsy in [245]. Other works have focused on nocturnal convulsive seizures
using hand-crafted detection algorithms [91,239] by exploiting optical flow cal-
culations and the reconstruction vector field of velocities [118]. The algorithm
quantifies the oscillatory movements seen as vibrations during the tonic phase,
and clonic movements in the clonic phase. Recently, Garção et al. [84] proposed
a privacy-preserving video-based seizure-detection and registration method to
classifygeneralizedtonic–clonicandfocaltobilateraltonic–clonicseizures.This
approach is based on optical flow, dimensionality reduction with principal com-
ponent analysis, seizure movement isolation with independent component anal-
ysis, and machine learning classification. However, these approaches are limited
in performance due to their inability to generalize to changing clinical environ-
ments (e.g. changes to subject orientation and distance, dealing with multiple
individuals in the field of view, accounting for lighting and furniture changes,
motion blur, variable frame rate) and their reliance on handcrafted features.
Seizure semiology detection: Within the landscape of seizure detection, several
deep learning models have emerged to improve the accuracy and objectivity
on the task at hand. Achilles et al. [2] introduced a system that utilizes CNNs
on streams from a combined depth and infrared (IR) sensor for seizure detec-
tion, outperforming traditional methods like using Histogram of Oriented Gra-
dients features with a Support Vector Machine classifier. Ahmedt-Aristizabal
et al. [8] showcased the effectiveness of quantitative facial expression analysis
--- PAGE 18 ---
18 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
based on deep learning in distinguishing facial semiology from patients with
Mesial Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (MTLE) during routine monitoring. Hyppönen
et al. [110] developed an objective myoclonus quantification methods for my-
oclonus Epilepsy type 1 (EPM1), obtaining a myoclonic jerk score from video
recordings using estimated human body key points. In pediatric patient data,
Yang et al. [253] employed a CNN-LSTM pipeline to detect generalized tonic-
clonicseizures(GTCSs),demonstratingsuperiorperformancecomparedtoframe
classification analysis (i.e. without considering the temporal dynamics). Eguchi
et al. [66], using a similar framework to detect epileptic spasms from long-term
video EEG, observed false positives due to voluntary patient movement, such
as arm swinging ortouchingthe face, emphasizing the challenges in distinguish-
ing relevant movements. Hou et al. [102] explored AI-based face transformation
modules, such as a cartoonization, for deidentification and semiology preserva-
tion when modelling epileptic seizures across various brain regions, including
frontal lobe, temporal lobe, occipital lobe, frontotemporal and temporoparietal
regions.Whilepromising,thestudyrevealedatrade-offbetweendeidentification
and the loss of clinical details, highlighting the need for specialized face models
to capture the heterogeneous nature of facial semiology.
For early detection, Fang et al. [70] proposed a spatio-temporal gated re-
current unit convolutional neural network capable of not only early detection,
but also of localizing the onset time of epileptic seizures. However, the specific
seizure types considered and whether the system detects the full expression of
the semiology or just the seizure onset remain unclear. In a recent study, Mehta
et al. [161] demonstrated the feasibility of detecting tonic-clonic seizures (TCS)
duringtheirprogressionbasedonopticalflowdata.Theapproachutilizedknowl-
edgedistillationandtransformer-basedapproaches,showcasinganoveldirection
for early detection while addressing privacy concerns.
The creation of devices capable of objectively recording seizure counts and
characteristics holds immense value, not only for seizures occurring during sleep
but also for those manifesting while awake. There has been an increasing inter-
est in the analysis of extensive video data collected at home, particularly for
understanding seizure semiology in patients using multiple recording modali-
ties [13]. A notable example is the Nelli®hybrid system [23], a semi-automatic
seizure monitoring platform utilizing audio/video inputs. This hybrid system
employs computer vision and machine learning to identify kinematic data asso-
ciated with seizures. Human experts then visually assess these identified events.
Theutilityforreviewingnocturnalvideorecordingsandmotorseizureshasbeen
demonstrated [16,185,139]. While Nelli demonstrates proficiency in detecting
subtle motor seizures, a study noted a lower accuracy in classifying more dis-
crete motor seizures such as myoclonic jerks, short tonic seizures, and epileptic
spasms [178]. The system has received endorsement for clinical use in Finland
fromagovernment-establishedbody,theNationalCoordinatingGroupforDrug-
resistant Epilepsy.
Seizuresemiologyclassification:Understandingtheevolutionofautomatedpipelines
in the context of video analysis for seizure event classification is crucial. While
--- PAGE 19 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 19
actionrecognitionrequiresextractingspatio-temporalfeaturesofmovementsfor
theclassificationofepilepsytypes,someworksoverlookthetemporalinformation
within seizures, treating the task as an image classification problem. For exam-
ple, Maia et al. [158] used an InceptionV3 feature extractor to extract features
for all frames, which were subsequently concatenated and fed to a multilayer
perceptron, to distinguish between TLE and ETLE within IR seizure videos.
Similarly, Pothula et al. [184] differentiated between gelastic and dacrystic fa-
cialseizuresusingafeatureextractionlayerthatrecognizesthepatient’semotion
throughafacialemotionrecognitionmodelandclassificationlayer(RandomFor-
est)thatreceivedconcatenatedfeatures.Theseapproachesignorevitaltemporal
informationbysimplyconcatenatingfeaturesacrossframes,andthusfailtoun-
derstand how behavior is changing over time (a key aspect for optimal seizure
semiology analysis). In contrast, Karácsony et al. [120] employed a 3D-CNN
(I3D)andanLSTMtoextractspatio-temporalfeaturestodistinguishTLEand
FLE using IR data. Then, the same authors in [122], extended the architecture
to 3 classes including a non-seizure class, and introduced a new pre-processing
pipeline, utilizing depth cropping to improve classification performance. Moro
et al. [165] extended this architecture to differentiate between non-hyperkinetic
seizures and sleep-related paroxysmal events, utilizing a majority voting scheme
for the entire video prediction.
Approachesfocusingonappearancefromthefullbodyasaregionofinterest
expose a limitation in evaluating specific semiology. For example, missing im-
portant clinical signs such as mouth automatisms (e.g. chewing, ictal pouting,
and smacking) and hand and finger semiology (e.g. waving, snapping finger and
tapping) due to the limited resolution that renders these semiology invisible.
Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al. [5] introduced a hierarchical approach, analyzing fa-
cial expressions, head and upper limb motions, and hand and finger movements
toclassifyMTLEandETLE.Ahierarchicalapproachtacklescomplexproblems
by reducing them to a smaller set of interrelated sub-systems, thus the authors
did not perform decision fusion, emphasizing the importance of each clinical
sign based on the development and sequence of multiple semiological features.
Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al. [9] introduced 3D face models that retain rich infor-
mation about the shape and appearance to evaluate mouth and cheek motions.
From the resultant 3D mesh of the face, spatial features are fed to an LSTM
to extract temporal relations between sequences to classify MTLE and ETLE.
Pemasirietal.[180]proposedaunifiedsemanticsegmentationapproachofbody
parts that precisely refines hand boundaries. This step is critical to filtering
out motion related to bedding and monitoring equipment, which is irrelevant to
hand semiology. The extraction of hand features follows the methodology in [5].
First, spatial features are extracted from a semantic segmentation architecture,
thendynamicvariationsofeachhandarecapturedwithanLSTMtodistinguish
between MTLE and ETLE. Most works classify epilepsy types from short video
clips (snippet-level classification), obtaining a subject-level prediction by aver-
aging all snippet-level predictions. To avoid potential misclassifications, Perez
et al. [182] used a spatio-temporal network to distinguish focal onset seizures
--- PAGE 20 ---
20 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
(FOSs) from focal to bilateral TCSs. The authors used temporal segment net-
works to capture semiological features across the entirety of the seizure, and an
RNN as a consensus function to learn seizure-level representations from the se-
quenceoffeatures.RecentlyOjanenetal.[171]demonstratedthepotentialofthe
Nellisystemdiscussedpreviouslytoclassifytonic,tonic-clonic,andhyperkinetic
seizures by utilizing motion and oscillation signal profiles.
Studies have explored multi-stream frameworks to analyze clinical manifes-
tations from the face, head and upper limbs movements. Ahmedt-Aristizabal et
al. [10] proposed a multi-framework fusion approach for facial and pose dynam-
ics,achievingpositiveresultsinidentifyingsemiologicalfeaturesassociatedwith
focal epilepsies, such MTLE and ETLE. The fusion process aims to extract use-
fulinformationfromasetofdifferentinputmodalitiesandmergetheminsucha
waythatallowsincreasinglyaccurateandrobustdecisionstobemade.Similarly,
Hou et al. [105] adopted a fusion framework for discriminating between features
ofdystoniaandemotioninhyperkineticseizurevideosusingmulti-streaminfor-
mation from keypoints and appearance. Rather than using a standard combi-
nation framework such as CNN-RNN architectures, the authors adopted GCNs
forseizureanalysis.Whilefusionapproachescanimproveclassificationaccuracy,
challenges arise when patients do not experience face and body semiology in all
seizures, or when videos only allow extracting facial features due to occlusions.
Distinguishing epileptic seizures from non-epileptic seizures: A main differential
diagnosis of epileptic seizures (ES) is psychogenic non-epileptic seizures (PNES,
also known as functional or dissociative seizures, part of the spectrum of func-
tionalneurologicaldisorder,FND).PNEShaveanon-epilepticcausethoughtto
involvepsychologicalandasyetpoorlyunderstoodneurologicalmechanisms[27].
Given that both ES and PNES can exhibit rhythmic movements, misdiagnosis
is common due to overlapping clinical features observed during these 2 distinct
seizure types. It is crucial to differentiate between the two, as their clinical
management differs, and misdiagnosis may result in unnecessary treatment and
associated complications. We refer in this section to both diagnostic groups,
epileptic seizures (ES) and FND, under the common label of seizure disorders.
In the study by Ahmedt-Aristizabal et. al. [4], skeleton-based and frame-based
frameworks were compared, with both providing effectiveness in distinguishing
betweenseizuredisorders.Theauthorsquantifiedsemiologyusingeitherafusion
ofreferencepointsandflowfieldsorbyanalyzingtheentirebodysimultaneously.
While this design is valuable for evaluating PNES, the region-based approach
raisesaclinicallimitationregardingtheobservationofisolatedsemiology.Inan-
other work, Hou et al. [103] demonstrated a method to process the appearance
and keypoint information for both pose and face streams. They introduced an
adaptive GCN where the graph’s topology could be learned on detected body
joints and facial landmarks for seizure classification. Knowledge distillation was
also adopted to regulate the keypoint features learned by the adaptive GCN.
However,includingjointinformationmayrenderthesystemvulnerableincondi-
tionswherejointestimationispoorlyperformed.Inasubsequentwork[104],the
same authors exploited appearance with a Transformer-based framework. This
--- PAGE 21 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 21
modelwaspre-trainedonlarge,unlabeledclinicalvideos(contextualvideos)and
then fine-tuned to distinguish between ES and PNES.
Seizure anomaly detection: In existing detection and multi-framework strate-
gies for classification, the sensitivity to potential aberrant or unusual semiology
poses a considerable challenge. The core task in this context is the identifica-
tion of data samples that deviate from the overall data distribution, a principal
task in anomaly detection. Anomaly detection methods play a crucial role in
pinpointing interesting, concerning, or unknown events by leveraging past pa-
tient cases stored in health records. Despite the straightforward definition, the
implementationofanomalydetectionfaceschallenges,primarilyfromtheincon-
sistent behavior of different anomalies and the lack of a constant definition for
what constitutes an anomaly [79]. As a result, effective learning with high mod-
eling capacity is required to segregate anomalous samples from normal data, a
task that has been insufficiently addressed in the existing vision-based seizure
semiology research. Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al. [6] introduced a system designed
to identify aberrant epileptic seizures, providing clinicians with alerts regarding
the occurrence of unusual events that deviate from a pre-learned database of
knownsemiology.Thisapproachclustersepilepticseizuresintoabest-fitmodel,
using a template of stereotypical behaviors of MTLE and ETLE in the form of
libraries.Theselibrariesstorefeaturerepresentationsofthemotionexhibitedby
patients during a recorded seizure. This approach enables users to determine if
the semiology from a new patient aligns with the learned information, aiding in
the identification of dissimilar findings or aberrant semiology.
Seizure evolution analysis: Recent advances in video analytics have been use-
ful in capturing and quantifying epileptic seizures. However, a critical aspect
that has often been overlooked is the representation of the evolving semiology,
specifically tracking the stepwise progression of clinical features. Many studies
focused on the detection and categorization of movement patterns, neglecting
the quantification of multi-segmental rhythmic behaviors and the identification
of certain movements, including the order in which they occurred. Understand-
ing the electroclinical patterns of a seizure requires a spatio-temporal profile to
beestablished,allowingfortheevaluationoftheseizure’soriginandpropagation
patterns[45].Approachesincorporatingstatisticalinformationofferquantitative
movement parameters by considering the entire duration of semiology [54]. Pre-
vious deep learning frameworks for HAR provide a single result reflecting the
classifier’s decision and cannot convey the dynamic changes observed. Ahmedt-
Aristizabal et al. [11] developed a system that captures the motion dynamics
of body, face and hand semiology, enabling the visualization and analysis of
dynamic changes over an entire seizure. This system utilizes a compact image
representationknownasamotionsignature,whichcapturesthespatiallocation
of semiology and the temporal relation between frames. It can also correlate
different types of semiology when a patient experiences multiple semiologies si-
multaneously,thusdisplayingtheorderofsignalsasastepwiseprogression.Hou
et al. [106] reported that automated video analysis enabled the characteriza-
tion of rhythmic body movements as a stereotyped expression of frontal seizure
--- PAGE 22 ---
22 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
semiology. The authors documented time-evolving frequencies as a foundation
for studying the correlation between the spectrum of EEG and the frequency of
head movements. Developing a system that provides a continuous flow of sig-
nals, highlighting changes in semiology and common clinical events, could be a
powerful tool to support seizure diagnosis and classification. Indeed, such de-
velopments applied to larger clinical datasets could shed new light on currently
unknown neural mechanisms underlying the behavioral expression of seizures.
Summary: A comprehensive overview of diverse deep learning techniques, their
correspondingsources,andtheauthorsfromTable1whohaveadaptedeachtech-
nique is presented in Table 2. The related works are systematically categorized
according to the frameworks discussed in Section 3.2. The categories include,
seizuredetection[3,245,91,239,84,2,8,110,66,70,161,6],image-based(static)seizure
classification [158,184], skeleton-based seizure classification [54,10,5,9], frame-
based seizure classification [10,5,180,4,253,120,121,122,165,182,104], and hybrid
networks for seizure classification [4,103,105]. This classification facilitates a
structured exploration of the diverse methodologies employed across different
aspects of seizure analysis within the deep learning paradigm.
4.2 General observations regarding vision-based seizure analysis
methods
While much progress has been made with respect to methods to detect and
classify seizures, there are many common limitations and/or oversights with
respect to these methods. Given the overview of existing applications in Section
4.1, we make the following observations:
1. The automated analysis of video-recorded seizures is greatly needed to sup-
port the detection and identification of epileptic seizures, as well as to bet-
ter understand the temporal evolution of seizures, from their clinical onset
through to termination. While this task has benefited from the use of ad-
vanced computer vision and machine learning algorithms, methods are lim-
itedbytheiruseofshortvideoclipsratherthantheentirevideoofaseizure.
This current approach limits the ability of systems to precisely detect the
clinical onset, or capture in fine-detail the propagation of semiology.
2. Improvingthespatio-temporalconsistencyofextractedfeaturesinaclinical
environment is crucial for improved analysis. This is particularly evident
whenconsideringtheconsistencyofthekeypointsandregionsofinterestthat
aredetectedacrosssequentialimages,aprioritythathasbeenoverlookedin
certain works.
3. Forsystemstobedeployedinareal-worldsettingitiscrucialthatpractition-
ers are confident that models can generalize to unseen patients. This is par-
ticularly important for analyzing complex motor behaviors in seizures, since
the overall behavioral repertoire and inter-subject and even intra-subject
variabilityisconsiderable.Assuch,whendevelopingandevaluatingsystems
researchers must ensure separation of patients between training and testing
sets, such that all footage of a given patient lies exclusively in either the
--- PAGE 23 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 23
Table 2: Data driven approaches adopted in Epilepsy for semiology analysis.
Approach DeeplearningMethods Authors
MoCap:keypoints/meshandregionofinterest
FasterR-CNN[188] [5]
PatientDetection MaskR-CNN[98] [4,11,158,120,122]
SSD[148] [103,105,104]
FasterR-CNN[188,114] [8,10]
FasterR-CNN[188,114]+Erdos-Renyiclustering[116] [5]
FaceDetection&
FindingTinyfaces[107]+Erdos-Renyiclustering[116] [9]
Tracking
FindingTinyfaces[107]+DeepSORT[241] [11]
SSD[148] [106,103,105]
TCDCN(2D)[262] [8]
Facelandmark FaceAlignment(2D)[36] [103]
PRNet(3D)[76] [9]
FaceSwap[248] [102]
Facetransformation
VToonify[252] [102]
Multiviewbootstrapping(pose-based)[201] [5]
HandsDetection&
Detect-and-track(pose-based) [94] [11]
Tracking
MaskR-CNN[98] [180]
Multiviewbootstrapping[201] [5]
Handlandmark
PAF+CPM(2Dpose) [37] [10,110]
KeypointRCNN(2DHPE)[98] [103]
Humanpose Thin-SlicingNetwork(2DHPE) [206] [5]
estimation&TrackingLSTMPoseMachines(2DHPE)[154] [4]
2Dpose+3Destimator(3DHPE)[47,271] [10,5,103]
Sensor-based(MicrosoftKinectcamera)(2D/3DHPE)[263,53,121] [54]
Video-basedseizureanalysis
STIP+FE+KNN [3]
STIP+FE+SVM [245]
OpticalFlow[118]+FE [91,239]
OpticalFlow[72]+FE [84]
OpticalFlow[181]+TSN[231]+ViT[63]+PKD[267] [161]
Seizuredetection CNNs+FC [2,253]
(Dynamic) CNN-GRU[52]+(TwoStreamCNNs[202]+TSN[230])+FC [70]
CNN-LSTM[62,95]+FC [8,66]
CNN-LSTM+MoCaplibrary+Cosinesimilarity [6]
2DHPE+FE+SVM [8]
2DHPE+OpticalFlow+FE+Statistics [110]
TheNelli®hybridsystem [23] [16,178,185,139]
InceptionV3[212]+MLP [158]
Seizureclassification
FER[67]+RF [184]
(Static)
Seizureclassification
3DHPE⋆+OpticalFlow+FE+Statistics [54]
3DHPE+FE+LSTM+FC [10,5,9]
(Skeleton-basedHAR)
CNN-LSTM[62,95]+FC [10,5,180,4,253]
I3D[40]+LSTM[95]+FC [120,121,122]
Seizureclassification
I3D[40]+Majorityvoting [165]
(Frame-basedHAR)
STCNN(TSNs)[231,92]+Bi-LSTM[205]+FC [182]
CNN(ResNet-152)[99]+Transformer[225,242]+FC [104]
(cid:0)2Dpose+FE+LSTM[95](cid:1)+(cid:0)OpticalFlow[175]+LSTM(cid:1)+FC [4]
S (H ei y z b u r r i e d c a la p s p s r ifi oa ca ch tion (cid:0)3Dpose+AGCNs[131,199]+KD[101,172](cid:1)+(cid:0)R(2+1)D[222]and [103,105]
HAR)
VGG-19[203]+TCNs[136](cid:1)
Tasks-constraineddeepconvolutionalnetwork(TCDCN);PositionmapRegressionNetwork(PRNet);HumanPoseEstima-
tion(HPE);PartAffinityFields(PAF);ConvolutionPoseMachines(CPM);LongShortTermMemories(LSTM);Feature
Engineering(FE)(handcraftedfeatureextraction);Spatio-temporalinterestpoints(STIP);K-NearestNeighbors(KNN);
SupportVectorMachines(SVM);ConvolutionalNeuralNetworks(CNNs);FullyConnectedlayer(FC);MotionCapture
(MoCap);Facialemotionrecognition(FER);RandomForest(RF);TemporalSegmentNetworks(TSNs);Spatio-temporal
CNN(STCNN);VisionTransformer(ViT);KnowledgeDistillation(KD);ProgressiveKnowledgeDistillation(PKD);Adap-
tiveGraphConvolutionalNetworks(AGCNs);GatedRecurrentUnit(GRU);Multilayerperceptron(MLP);Bidirectional
LSTM(Bi-LSTM);⋆Humanposedetectedwithdepthcamerahardware;
training or the testing set to evaluate the generalizability of the proposed
system.Insomeworks,thisdataseparationwasnotconsidered,whichcould
--- PAGE 24 ---
24 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
produce misleadingly high performances. The inclusion of subject-specific
features may introduce data leaks, boosting performance without a genuine
basis for the target classification.
4. One limitation of multi-framework approaches for quantifying and classi-
fying clinical manifestations is their reliance on supervised learning, which
assumes the test data originates from one of the training categories. When
an input sample does not align with any of the training categories (model
uncertainty), the trained model becomes ineffective. This is evident when
consideringthelimitedperformancewhenclassifyingthesemiologyofunseen
patients, as indicated by a low Leave-One-Subject-Out Cross-Validation ac-
curacy. This limitation to analyzing seizure-specific features not represented
in the training set raises concerns about a network’s generalization capabil-
ities.
5. Further understanding of the dynamic changes in movement frequency and
amplitude of stereotyped movements across a range of pathologies could
help shed light on possible shared pathophysiological mechanisms. To this
end,documentingthekinematicpropertiesofstereotypicalmovementsusing
automated video analysis could be a useful tool.
6. Inthedomainofvision-basedactionrecognition,itiscrucialtoexercisecau-
tion when comparing methodologies, as performance metrics are reliant on
supervisedlearningfromspecificbehaviors.Notallsemiologiesandsubjects
exhibit uniform characteristics, making direct comparisons between meth-
odsdifficult.Withoutastandardizedpublicdatasetfeaturingrawvideosfor
benchmarking, claims of superiority for one method over another risk being
misleading. A meticulous approach to comparison involves considering the
dataset’s composition, the diversity of represented behaviors, and the con-
text of the analysis. It is essential to recognize that each methodology may
excel under specific conditions while exhibiting limitations under others.
7. To facilitate fair comparisons, recent releases of public datasets based on
optical flow representation of different seizure semiologies [182,161], provide
a valuable resource for researchers to conduct standardized evaluations of
frame-basedHARapproaches.Arecentopenseizuredatabasethatfacilitates
research into non-EEG seizure detection [183] (accelerometry, photoplethys-
mography,andpulse-oximetry)isexpectedtofostercollaborativeeffortsand
advance the field of seizure detection. However, there is an increasing need
for datasets that provide more comprehensive visual context, particularly
regarding behaviors such as facial expressions and hand movements. Strik-
ing a balance between data sharing and privacy preservation is challenging
yet essential. Possibly, using facial transformation methods in clinical video
datasets could mitigate privacy issues and allow datasets of sufficient size to
be assembled [102].
8. In the context of seizure analysis, addressing the challenges associated with
the “black box” nature of machine learning models is essential. Explainable
AI approaches are expected to provide more value for clinicians, fostering
trust and understanding in the application of these models in real-world
medical scenarios [134]. However, explainable AI methods must be suitable
--- PAGE 25 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 25
for use by non-deep learning experts, something that is arguably not the
case for present interpretation techniques.
9. Generalisation to unseen subjects has been a consistent challenge when per-
forming medical machine learning tasks due to the high degree of subject
variability. The recent emergence of foundation models, large-scale models
trained in a self-supervised manner on diverse datasets, offers a potential
direction to improve generalization if video-based foundation models can be
leveraged as a starting point for model development.
10. Withinthebroaderdeep-learningfieldtherehasbeenatrendtowardsbuild-
ing end-to-end systems, that is a single system that takes an input and pro-
duces the desired output with no intermediate steps or additional outputs.
ThisparadigmislessprevalentwithinEpilepsyanalysis,thoughrecentend-
to-endtransformer-basedmethodsconcernedwithwholebodyanalysishave
beenproposed.Thelackofend-to-endsystemslikelystemsfromacombina-
tionofthelackofsuitablylargedatasetstotrainsuchsystems,arelianceon
existingmethods(i.e.posedetection)tounderpinthemethods,andalsothe
lack of interpretability that such end-to-end systems offer. It is also worth
considering if such end-to-end methods are even appropriate, as processing
a whole-body image in an end-to-end fashion is likely to result in hand and
faceregionsarethattoosmallfromwhichtoextractfinemotormovements.
5 Pipeline for quantified analysis of seizure video
recordings
In addressing the complexities of vision-based semiology analysis for seizure
video recordings, our proposed pipeline introduces a comprehensive method-
ologycomprisingdistinctmodulesconnectedtoformanintegratedsystem.This
system is unique and provides important supplementary and unbiased data to
assess video-recorded seizures through clinical implementation. The proposed
ecosystem encompasses key components such as motion capture of keypoints
andregionsofinterest,facilitatingthepreciseextractionofrelevantspatialinfor-
mation.Further,motionsignaturesandtime-evolvingfrequenciesofstereotyped
movementscontributeinvaluableinsightsintopatternsthatcharacterizeseizure-
related behaviors. The pipeline extends to the analysis of seizure disorders and
robustseizuredetectionmechanisms.Multi-streamframeworkshavebeenincor-
porated for refined seizure classification, ensuring an understanding of varied
seizure types. Moreover, an inspection of aberrant behaviors, model prediction
verification, and model interpretation modules enhance the interpretability and
reliabilityoftheentiresystem.Suchadynamicandmodularpipelineisdepicted
in Figure 4. The subsequent subsections provide detailed explanations of each
module, elucidating their roles and contributions within this unified framework.
5.1 Motion capture
The motion capture module constitutes the foundational component within the
proposedpipeline,andisdesignedforthedetectionandrepresentationofmotor
--- PAGE 26 ---
26 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
Fig.4: Overview of an automatic seizure video evaluation system. A potential
implementation could be a closed-loop system designed for clinical deployment
in the hospital that integrates: A. A flexible and modular markerless motion
capture solution, B. A method enabling the inspection of the stepwise progres-
sion of clinical features and the order of signs, C. An analysis of the whole
body to distinguish seizure disorders such as PNES, D. A flexible and modular
multi-streamframeworktoevaluateisolatedsemiologies,E.Aninspectionofthe
classification results and model uncertainty (model confidence), as well as a set
of model-agnostic methods to interpret deep learning methodologies, and F. An
anomaly detection module to update the system with aberrant video features of
semiology. ES: Epileptic seizures; FND: functional neurological disorder; PNES:
psychogenic non-epileptic seizures.
seizurescharacterizedbytheirdistinctivemotionpatterns.Itemployskeypoints
and regions of interest to obtain a detailed representation, integrates 3D rep-
resentations to enhance spatial understanding, and incorporates feature track-
ing with temporal connections to ensure motion coherence during a seizure.
The module also includes scene segmentation techniques to differentiate patient
movementsfromunrelatedactivities,addressingchallengessuchasvaryingcam-
era angles and resolutions. The module extends to include occlusion augmenta-
tion during training for improved detection in challenging environments, as well
as super-resolution or image enhancement techniques to handle low-resolution
images. It incorporates physics-constrained modeling such as biomechanical dy-
namicsmethods,andmayinvolveemulationapproachestorepresentcomplexdy-
namics [97]. Despite the motivations outlined in this manuscript and the wealth
of related work, the application of deep learning to seizure video analysis re-
mains considerably under-explored. This is evidenced by the adoption of model
architectures that are not at the forefront of recent advancements, as indicated
in Table 2. In comparison to the rapid progress observed in computer vision
research, particularly in recent years, the exploration of deep learning within
the domain of seizure video analysis appears to lag significantly representing a
noticeabledisparityintheadvancementoftheserespectivefields.Theflexibility
ofthismoduleallowsforcontinuousimprovementthroughtheintegrationofad-
vanced computer vision approaches outlined in Section 3.3.1 and Section 3.4.1.
Thisadaptabilityensuresthemodule’sresiliencetotechnologicaladvancements,
--- PAGE 27 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 27
maintaining accuracy and robustness in motion detection. Further research op-
portunities addressing the challenges of motion capture are described in Sec-
tion 6.1, along with privacy preservation solutions for patients in Section 6.2.
5.2 Seizure detection and temporal analysis
A comprehensive examination of the evolution of video-recorded seizure-related
clinical manifestations in patients with Epilepsy is imperative. From an algo-
rithmic perspective, the initial phase involves the detection or identification of
a relevant time range for further analysis. The generic model performing this
task must be versatile enough to accommodate various seizure types, allowing
algorithmstoisolatemomentsofinterestandcompareextractedfeaturestopre-
definedthresholds.Diverseresearchandcommercialoptionsweredocumentedin
Section4.1.Theanalysisofseizureevolution,aimedatdiscerningthepresenceor
absence of specific movement features and dynamic changes, is a major compo-
nent of Epilepsy patient assessment. Seizure manifestations that can be readily
detected in present video analyses encompass a spectrum, ranging from repeti-
tiverhythmicmovementoftrunks,limbsorhands,suchaswholebodyrockingor
manipulationofanobject;toamoreintensepresentationcharacterizedbyexces-
siveamountsofamplitude,speed,andacceleration[35,29].Aswellasbody/limb
movementpatterns,seizure-relatedfacialchangesmaybringvaluablesemiologic
information, e.g. muscular contraction, eye deviation or emotional facialexpres-
sion [105]. This module, illustrated in Figure 4, focuses on the development of
a computer-based tool designed to analyze the stepwise progression (or simul-
taneous occurrence) of clinical features. This tool has the capability to discern
dominant features, categorizing them based on speed, periodicity, the frequency
of events, and differences in motions. Moreover, the module explores the corre-
lation of motion across different body parts, given that epileptic seizures often
transition from one clinical manifestation to another over a certain timescale
that might help predict seizure propagation. The incorporation of a motion sig-
natureorsemiologicalfingerprintprovestobevaluablewhenscrutinizingvideos,
presentingsemiologyasaflowofsigns[11].Toenhancetheinterpretabilityofthe
identified kinematic data, human experts can visually assess the time-evolving
frequency properties of seizures [106] which may support an understanding of
the mechanisms underlying such behaviors. Additional details regarding an au-
tomated fine-grained action analysis are discussed in Section 6.3.
5.3 Analysis and detection of seizure disorders
Prior to the execution of vision-based semiology classification for epilepsies,
the “Controller” in the system will exclusively provide to the “Process” mod-
ule seizure disorders categorized as epileptic seizures. As discussed previously in
Section 4.1, seizure semiology is an essential component for patient monitoring
and can differentiate between epileptic and non-epileptic seizures. This module
focuses on identifying PNES or FND, which lack the characteristic changes in
cortical activity associated with epilepsy, sometimes contributing to misdiagno-
sis.Toaddressthis,themoduleincorporatesend-to-endframeworksthatanalyze
--- PAGE 28 ---
28 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
the entire body simultaneously, adopting proper seizure-level prediction [182]
capturing semiological features across the entirety of arbitrarily long seizure,
rather than averaging all snippet-level predictions from short clips. Averaging
predictions is effective when the same action occurs along most of the seizure
video duration, but given the variable propagation of semiology, this is not the
typical case. This module utilizes temporal segment networks to split videos of
any duration into n non-overlapping segments and extract spatial features from
input frames [182], as opposed to traditional CNNs [4]. Subsequently, the mod-
ule leverages transformers to effectively learn temporal relations between the
extracted spatial features of the seizure patterns, as demonstrated in previous
works [104,161]. The transformer-based pre-training approach can learn robust
and generalizable features, taking advantage of large unannotated data from
medical databases of past seizure records. To ensure generalization when anno-
tatedexamplesarescarce,themodulecanbeflexiblebyincorporatingemerging
approaches such as meta-learning [156] and domain adaptation [61] which are
becoming particularly valuable in the medical domain.
5.4 Multi-stream frameworks for seizure classification
After the presence of an epileptic seizure is confirmed by the preceding module,
thefocusofthe“Process” moduleshiftstotheanalysisofdiverseclinicalmanifes-
tations, including isolated semiologies captured from one or more cameras. The
models employed in this module are designed to serve as detectors for common
lateralization and localization signs, including phenomena such as head version,
mouthautomatism,dystoniclimbposturing,handautomatisms[18,78,209],and
evenspecificsignslikethethumbs-upgesture[226].Themulti-streamframework
exhibitsflexibilityincapturingdynamicchangesthroughappearance,keypoints,
and theanalysis ofthe 3Ddistribution ofbodyparts, face andhand landmarks,
employing either a fusion approach [10,105] or a hierarchical approach [5]. De-
pending on the specific downstream task, such as classifying GTCS, MTLE,
ETLE, etc, users have the ability to identify the most relevant motion features
deserving attention for a given patient, allowing customization of the analy-
sis for the complete body [122,104], face [9,105], or hands [180]. Recognizing
that a single semiologic sign in isolation will likely not provide sufficient insight,
the integration of validation accuracies for each clinical manifestation is cal-
culated. This consolidated information supports clinical experts in making the
finaldecision.Furthermore,theobservedictalbehaviorcanbecorrelatedfroma
semi-automated perspective with neuronal activity findings, whose concordance
is necessary for localization purposes, as has been demonstrated by preliminary
research in [106,259]. Methodologies discussed in this module can be further
enhanced with open-set action recognition strategies [21] that require the net-
worktocorrectlyclassifyin-distributionsamplesandidentifyout-of-distribution
samples. This is discussed further in Section 6.4.
--- PAGE 29 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 29
5.5 Model prediction analysis and interpretation
This module serves a dual purpose. Firstly, it aims to provide insights into the
confidencelevelsassociatedwitheachclassification,addressingthepotentialper-
ceptionofdeepmodelsasa“blackbox” byconveyingtheuncertaintyinherentin
a model’s decisions. Secondly, it strives to offer model-agnostic interpretations,
facilitating a deeper understanding of predictions by providing contextual in-
formation. Visualizations are employed to showcase the variety of semiological
patterns that are present in the database, highlighting dissimilarities between
patterns exhibited by different patients. This visual representation reflects the
classifier’s confidence and aids in the interpretation of “correct” or “incorrect”
classification decisions [5]. The incorporation of Bayesian deep learning [125] or
deep ensemble approaches [135] in this module is integral to the uncertainty
quantification process.
Recent works in vision-based seizure semiology (Table 1) and review pa-
pers[119,132]confirmthecurrentlackofexplainabilitywithinexistingmethods.
This absence of “transparency” poses a significant barrier to the complete adop-
tion of AI in clinical practice, as physicians are hesitant to trust machine learn-
ing model predictions without sufficient evidence and interpretation, especially
in disease classification. This module incorporates attribution-based methods,
popular in the medical domain for their model-agnostic plug-and-play nature.
To support module development, studies involving expert clinicians to rate ex-
planations and assess the limitations of model-agnostic interpretation methods
are crucial [14]. Further studies should explore clinical workflow integration and
investigate how clinical experts could refine model decisions, as demonstrated
with the Nelli®hybrid system [23] for seizure detection. Additional research
strategies in interpretability for human action recognition are outlined in Sec-
tion 6.5.
5.6 Anomaly detection - aberrant epileptic seizure
Recognizingactions(motorbehaviors)inthecontextofepilepticseizuresischal-
lengingduetotheirsubjectiveanddynamicnature.Differentclinicalmanifesta-
tions,suchasoralandmanualautomatism,canhavealargeamountofvariation
intheirexecution,andmaysometimesberelatedtonormalbehavior,makingit
difficultforrecognitionmodelstogeneralizeeffectively.Whilealargerlabeledor
unlabeled semiology database could potentially enhance accuracy, especially in
situations where technology and clinical expertise are available, we aim to aug-
ment our system with a “Feedback” module. This module is designed to detect
unusualoraberrantbehaviors,contributingtotheoverallrobustnessandadapt-
ability of the overall framework. In addressing this task, epileptic seizures are
grouped into a best-fit model using a template of stereotypical behaviors com-
monly observed in various forms of epileptic seizures, organized into libraries.
Thisallowsthesystemtoidentifywhetherthetestsemiologycanfitintowithina
setofknowncategories[6].Semi-supervisedvideoanomalydetectiontechniques,
suchasdeepautoencoders,alsoproveeffectiveinthiscontext,leveragingthefull
--- PAGE 30 ---
30 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
potential of normal data while addressing issues of weak labeling and data im-
balance [167]. However, the selection of the most suitable deep-learning method
for video anomaly detection depends on the available datasets.
Through continuous monitoring and identification of deviations from typi-
cal epileptic behaviors, the system dynamically evolves using an active learning
mechanism. This iterative process enables the system to update its understand-
ing of abnormal patterns, improving its ability to classify and interpret diverse
manifestations. When the module detects an aberrant behavior, a human-in-
the-loopreviewprocessinvolvingclinicalexperts[220]assessesthenatureofthe
abnormality.Thehuman-reviewedinstancesareintegratedbackintothetraining
dataset, facilitating the deployment of a refined model.
5.7 Future implementation
Inthefuture,wecanimaginesuchasystembeingincorporatedintotheEpilepsy
MonitoringUnitvideoset-upsuchthatclinicianscanbothreviewthevideo-EEG
data in the manner they currently do, and benefit from a user-friendly interface
that would allow additional objective automated video analysis to complement
theirownvisualassessment(similartothecurrentclinicaluseofautomatedEEG
or MRI quantification software). Such a system could, for example, automati-
cally measure the frequency of seizure-related rhythmic movements, compare
the similarity index between different seizures from the same patient, compute
a predictive score for diagnosis (e.g. ES versus PNES), or predict likely cere-
bral localization and/or lateralization with estimation of confidence intervals.
This would be most useful for complex motor semiology (e.g. patterns seen in
hyperkinetic seizures) [73].
Self-learning systems based on deep learning approaches will become more
accurateasdataaccumulates,progressivelyallowingformoreprecisecategoriza-
tion of different semiologic patterns, including complex ones that are currently
challenging for clinicians to interpret. As privacy-preservation methods become
moreadvancedandmethodsstarttobeusedonalargerscalewithmorecollab-
oration and data sharing between clinical teams, knowledge of neural correlates
of different semiologic patterns will expand. Knowledge sharing will likely be
helped by similar quantified methods being applied to simultaneous electroen-
cephalographicdata(especiallystereo-electroencephalography,SEEG),overseen
by expert clinicians and using seizure freedom after epilepsy surgery as an addi-
tional ground truth where appropriate. Once validated in specialist centers, the
developed techniques may then be applicable to increasingly apply automated
video analysis of seizures in ambulatory settings as well, maximizing access to
accurate seizure diagnosis and meeting a critical current gap in Epilepsy care.
BeyondtheEpilepsymonitoringunitenvironment,otherseizurevideorecording
methodsincludingsmartphones[273]mightbenefitfromsomeinbuiltautomated
tools, with lightweight processing capacity, to complement the clinicians’ visual
analysis,whichcouldmakeapreciseandtimelydiagnosisofseizuresmorewidely
available.
--- PAGE 31 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 31
6 Research opportunities for video-based seizure analysis
6.1 Clinical challenges of motion capture and domain adaptation
Motion analysis is one of the main approaches that can assist medical practi-
tioners in analyzing semiology. In [119], authors reviewed MoCap methods in
relation to medical challenges including occlusions, viewpoints variations, and
low-resolution 3D MoCap; and suggested paradigms that can be considered to
address these challenges. Here, we provide some outline MoCap challenges and
guidelinesthatcanbeleveragedtoassistwithsemiologyanalysis.Therepertoire
of movement patterns and facial expressions observed in human seizures is ex-
tremely large, complex and heterogeneous compared to those studied in animal
models[132],thusideallysuitedtobenefitfrommachinelearningapproachesbut
also very challenging in terms of obtaining adequate test data sets with expert
clinician labelling.
The MoCap information obtained from face detection and tracking and fa-
cial landmarks can be beneficial for semiology analysis. In Table 2, works that
have applied computer vision algorithms for facial MoCap are listed. In the ma-
jority of these works, the authors considered 2D approaches for their analysis,
whereas more information could be inferred from 3D facial analysis. For exam-
ple, Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al. [9] leveraged a 2D to 3D computer vision algo-
rithm [76] to include rich facial (mouth) information in their analysis. Advances
in computer vision algorithms facilitate the estimation of 3D locations from 2D
videos/images(e.g.[198]reviewsSOTAmodelsfor3Dfacereconstructionusing
deep learning). These new approaches allow high-quality 3D face reconstruc-
tions,whichinreturnprovidesmoreinformationsuchasdynamicfacialchanges
that can be used in semiology analysis.
The hand MoCap pipeline used in previous semiology studies [5,11] has
demonstrated promising performance, though the most recent computer vision
methods are yet to be investigated for semiology videos. For example, in recent
worksdomainadaptationalongwithself-supervisionhasbeenusedtoassistwith
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis [256], which is a challenging task in
medical AI. Other examples of more advanced hand MoCap are analyzing 3D
poses [50,68], or methods that deal with hand occlusion [261].
In addition to the aforementioned recent techniques for face and hand Mo-
Cap, increasingly advanced algorithms for human pose extraction can be ex-
plored on semiology data. 2D human pose estimation can be inferred through
transformers(ViTPose)[247],while3Dposeestimationmethodshavebeenpro-
posedusinggraphneuralnetworks(GCN)[265].Methodsproposedby[266]and
[270]canleveragespatialandtemporalinformationfromsequencesofsemiology
videos to improve pose estimation. Test-time adaptation [138], domain adapta-
tion[32]orknowledgedistillation[161,105]arehelpfulwhenthereisnoaccessto
the source data for training, or in cases where only a small dataset is available.
Advancements in computer visionMoCap methods have demonstrated high-
performancegains,particularlyonpublicdatasets.Forexample,indomainslike
3D face reconstruction and 3D pose estimation, novel techniques such as trans-
--- PAGE 32 ---
32 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
formers or graph-based methods have been introduced. These methods show
promise in addressing challenges such as occlusion and providing a more ro-
bust representation of dynamic features in faces, hands, or the body. The ad-
vancements, which have shown success in various applications, warrant explo-
ration in the context of seizure semiology analysis. As experience and sensitiv-
ity/specificityofmethodsimproved,moresubtlediscriminationwillbepossible,
e.g. distinguishing between ASD-related hand stereotypies and epileptic move-
ments in a patient with both conditions. As such, future work may concern
the prediction of depression scores from facial expression analysis etc, in pa-
tients with epilepsy, i.e. detecting presence of comorbidities in the resting state
(between-seizure periods), which could be considered as “inter-ictal semiology”.
6.2 Preserving privacy in patient monitoring for Epilepsy
The application of AI in healthcare presents ethical dilemmas that require care-
ful consideration. A primary ethical concern for healthcare AI is privacy and
data security. As AI algorithms depend on extensive patient data for training
and optimization, securing sensitive patient data and limiting access to autho-
rized personnel only is essential. Recent reviews concerning AI and medical AI
privacy-preservation[127,186]demonstratedifferenttechniquesthatcanbeused
toprotecttheprivacyofpatients’data.Here,webrieflyexplainvisualapproaches
known as obfuscation that can be used to protect semiology videos.
Visual techniques, also known as de-identification techniques, are designed
to enhance visual privacy. The prevalent approach in semiology data involves
transforming the image or video data into another modality, such as converting
video to optical flow. These pipelines [91,239,84,161] can operate locally within
the hospital, safeguarding patient privacy while providing motion semiotics of
seizures.However,theyfallshortinprovidingcontextfortheanalysisofspecific
behaviors of interest, such as small facial or hand semiology. For example, facial
seizure manifestations (i.e. involuntary seizure-induced gaze deviation, specific
facial contraction patterns, or emotional facial expression) may bring key infor-
mation to clinical seizure analysis are often not visible in optical flow images.
Another visual-based approach is image swapping/synthesis, which is em-
ployed to conceal a patient’s identity while conveying information not easily
leveragedbyopticalflow-basedapproaches.Forinstance, [272]developedaface-
swapping method for patients with Parkinson disease, and demonstrated that
face swapping could preserve the facial landmarks while hiding the patient’s
identity.Theefficacyofdifferentfacetransformationapproacheswastheninves-
tigatedinpatientswithfacialsemiologycapturedduringepilepticseizures[102].
Swapping the whole body with an avatar can also be beneficial for privacy pro-
tection,andsuchtechniquesarebasedonestimatinglandmarks/pose,generating
a high-quality mesh, and replacing the human body in a video or image with
an avatar [192,176]. Image or video synthesis can also be used at a higher level
to generate synthetic data for semiology. For instance, advanced methods that
take text [217] or physics-based approaches [257] along with semiology expert
knowledge can be investigated to generate such data.
--- PAGE 33 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 33
Image distortion, such as blurring or pixelation, is an image-level technique
that can be leveraged to preserve patients’ identities. Blurring or pixelation
involves applying a filter to a specific part of an image, such as the face to make
thesubjectunidentifiable.Whilethesealterationscanpartiallypreserveprivacy,
theyarevulnerabletoreconstructionattacks[157]andaredeficientinpreserving
MoCap semiology features [109].
Privacy preservation can also be achieved at the model or system level
through design to render patients unidentifiable. In this approach, data, algo-
rithms, or both are structured to prevent mechanisms relating to facial analysis
from revealing the patient’s identity, while maintaining high performance of the
actionrecognitionpipeline.Forinstance,[189]developedanadversarialtraining
paradigm to anonymize human faces in videos without affecting action recog-
nition performance. Another example involves leveraging homomorphic encryp-
tion[130],whichretainsactiondetectionperformancewhileensuringinformation
confidentiality.
Federated learning has gained widespread attention for its capacity to train
machine learning models while preserving privacy. Positioned as a system-level
privacymechanism,federatedlearningensurestheprotectionofpatients’privacy
bykeepingtheirinformationlocalized,eliminatingtheneedfordatainterchange.
This decentralized approach is designed to learn from heterogeneous datasets,
converging into a global model that upholds local privacy standards [128,129].
Lietal.[141]proposedafederatedlearningapproachtotrainactionrecognition
models without central collection of users’ sensor data.
Finally, visual privacy can also be achieved at the sensor level. For exam-
ple, extremely low-resolution cameras have been explored for action recogni-
tion[55,194,20,236].Videosobtainedfromtheselow-resolutioncamerascanpre-
serve patient privacy while enabling the inference of semiological actions.
The application of privacy-preserving paradigms in semiology is not only
beneficial for patients but also for the computer vision community, allowing
data and models to be shared and benchmarked to improve the performance of
current algorithms. In addition, a memory bank or profile can be built for each
patient, which can be shared among semiology experts for further analysis.
6.3 Fine-grained analysis of actions for the propagation of semiology
Epilepticseizuresarecharacterizedbymultipleclinicalfeatureswhichtransition
overashorttimescale(seconds-minutes),reflectingtheanatomicalspreadofthe
electrical seizure activity, in both its spatial (anatomic) and temporal (e.g. dis-
charge frequency) aspects [159]. Knowledge of clinically plausible seizure types
and propagation pathways can therefore make a valuable contribution to the
differentiation of focal seizure types, their differential diagnoses and the cere-
bralorganizationofseizureactivity[169].Existingactionrecognitionmodels,as
discussed in Section 4, often focus on recognizing full video segments without
capturing subtle transitions or dependencies between different clinical manifes-
tations. This limitation hinders the understanding of the temporal evolution of
seizures from onset to termination.
--- PAGE 34 ---
34 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
Humanactionrecognitionoffersanavenuetocapturetheevolutionofsemiol-
ogy, and such approaches fall into two categories: discrete methods that operate
on pre-segmented videos (current research in vision-based semiology); and con-
tinuous fine-grained methods consider not only the actions but also capture the
transitions between them. While discrete methods demonstrate higher perfor-
mance,theyaredisconnectedfromreal-worldscenarioscomposedoffine-grained
actions. Fine-grained action analysis allows tracking of previously observed ac-
tions and exploring relationships between consecutive actions, capturing both
inter (long term) and intra (short term) sequence relationships [82,59].
In [136] a temporal convolutional network (TCN) segments a sequence of
human actions into action segments, capturing information such as action du-
rations, pairwise transitions, and long-range action dependencies in the actions
performed. The multi-stage TCN model (MS-TCN) [71] enhances the temporal
resolution by aggregating information across multiple-stages. A further exten-
sion, boundary-aware cascade networks, addresses issues related to inaccurate
action segmentation boundaries and misclassified short action segments [237].
However, these networks rely on detailed information about action boundaries
which may be impractical for seizure analysis due to the dynamic nature of
seizures (i.e. for human action segmentation each action is temporally local-
ized with precise start and end times). Action segmentation models for seizures
mustminimizerelianceondenseframe-levelsupervisionduetothedifficultiesin
definingthestartandendofspecificsemiologies.Towardsthis,somepreliminary
semi-supervised and pseudo-labeling strategies were introduced in [83,204].
Inthecontextofsemiologyanalysis,weaklysupervisedactionsegmentation,
which utilizes signals like ordered and unordered action lists without frame-
by-frame labels, becomes more relevant. To exploit a sequential list of actions,
some works adjust action boundaries gradually with a soft labeling scheme [60],
or train class-specific discriminative action prototypes [44]. Considering weaker
forms of supervision which lack action ordering and frequency information,
i.e.howmanyrepetitionsofeachactionoccur[191],authorshavelearnedaseg-
mentationnetworkdirectlyfromtheactionsetsusingasetpredictionloss[74],or
introduced a pairwise order consistency loss to penalize disagreements in order-
ing between the extracted templates and the segmentation model outputs [151].
Action segmentation is a rapidly evolving topic that holds promise in repre-
senting the evolution of semiology, and offers several directions that will drive
progress and innovation in the field.
6.4 Activity recognition in open-set environments
Action recognition models, despite being valuable and effective in numerous
medical applications, have a number of drawbacks. These limitations include
theincapabilitytogeneralizetounfamiliaractions,aninabilitytoaccommodate
new action categories, and difficulties in handling ambiguous actions. Conse-
quently, these limitations have spurred the emergence of open-set action analy-
sisapproaches.Theseapproachesaimtoaddressthesechallengesbyrecognizing
--- PAGE 35 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 35
both known and unknown actions, thereby enhancing robustness and establish-
ing more scalable and reliable recognition systems.
DEAR [21], an open-set action recognition model proposed by Bao et al.,
addresses these issues by estimating the uncertainty associated with individual
labeled actions. This estimation of uncertainty is instrumental in differentiat-
ing between known and unknown samples. Consequently, the deep neural net-
work recognizes and quantifies uncertainty in its predictions. MULE [264], a
multi-label evidential learning approach for open-set action recognition, lever-
agestheconceptofevidentiallearning.Specifically,evidentiallearningallowsfor
the quantification of uncertainty in predictions. By using a multi-label formula-
tion,themodeliscapableofassigningmultiplelabelstoaninput,includingboth
known and unknown actions. Recently, [42] examined the behavior of feature
representationsinthecontextofopen-setactionrecognition.Drawinginspiration
frominformationbottlenecktheory, [42]proposedamethodtoenhancetheper-
formancebyenlargingtheinstance-specificandclass-specificinformationpresent
in a feature. The enhancement component for class-specific information lever-
ages a classifier that has been trained to refine feature representations, thereby
increasing the discriminative power of the model. Through this approach, the
model explicitly models the distinctions between known and unknown classes,
leading to more effective differentiation during the recognition process.
The exploration of open-set action analysis has yielded promising strategies
toovercomelimitationsintraditionalactionrecognitionmodels.Theseadvance-
ments signify a meaningful stride forward in the continuous evolution of seizure
semiology analysis.
6.5 Explainable patient activity recognition based on interpretable
models
Machine learning models developed through deep learning techniques are often
regardedascomplexanddifficulttointerpret,typicallynecessitatingspecialized
methods for understanding their inner workings. Gaining an understanding of
deeplearningmodels,oftenregardedasenigmatic“blackboxes”,canbeachieved
through techniques such as analyzing feature importance [153], visualizing acti-
vations [24], employing Grad-CAM [196], utilizing saliency maps [117], guided
backpropagation [208], applying Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explana-
tions (LIME) [190,179], utilizing t-SNE for data visualization [155], optimizing
activationpatterns[213],conductingmodel-specificvisualization[46],andincor-
porating attention mechanisms [96]. These techniques provide insights into the
decision-makingprocessesofdeeplearningmodels,withaparticularemphasison
spatial data inputs. This contributes to enhancing model transparency and reli-
ability across diverse applications. However, these methods are most applicable
to spatio-temporal data to gain spatial insights.
One of the major hindrances in generating spatio-temporal interpretation
outputs is the lack of a model-agnostic interpretation pipeline. This is challeng-
ing,asthespatio-temporalinterpretationillustratesthesignificanceofdetecting
biases in video data and action associations through deeper network analysis.
--- PAGE 36 ---
36 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
The motion-guided sampler (MGSampler) [268] attempted to interpret the dy-
namic motion characteristics by leveraging motion as a fundamental signal for
frame selection. It utilizes a frame selection approach that ensures an even dis-
tribution of frames across important segments, characterized by high motion
salience, achieved through the accumulation of motion data. M-MiT [163] pro-
videsamorecomprehensivemethodthatisfocusedoninterpretingactionrecog-
nitionmodels.Thismethodisfocusedonexaminingtheseinterpretablefeatures
and how they contribute to a network’s output. It reveals insights that might
otherwise remain concealed without the capacity to identify underlying action
concepts.
Graph-based models offer an intuitive representation that is easily inter-
pretable.However,learningdirectlyfromthedatacanposechallengesforgraph-
based models. A recent approach [269] utilizes a graph structure to represent
the interactions between different body parts throughout the motion sequence.
The graph construction is based on the spatial relationships among body joints,
enabling the model to capture the influence joints have on one another’s move-
ments. This spatial information facilitates the interpretability of the model in
terms of spatial relationships. Furthermore, the sequential nature of the motion
data allows for the modeling of temporal relationships, enhancing the model’s
interpretability in terms of temporal aspects.
Predicting human motion in future frames is another widely used approach
to interpret dynamic sequences and their corresponding actions. This technique
allows us to gain valuable insights into the model’s training focus and potential
biases towards the specific data it has been trained on. [214] have successfully
achieved an adaptive and concise representation for diverse graph structures of
human motion when modeling the spatio-temporal actions using complex struc-
tured graphs. This graph-based approach incorporates the spatial and temporal
dependencies by considering the sequential nature of the motion data which
allows the model to effectively capture the temporal relationships between dif-
ferentframesinthemotionsequence.Additionally,thisframeworkcanestablish
temporaldependenciesinthesubsequentframes,whichcancontributetomodel
interpretability.
Anaturalquestionthatarisesisifthedecision-makingprocessindeeplearn-
ing models for action recognition in semiology can be interpretable. Consider-
ing the spread of deep processing for various medical applications, explainabil-
ity and quantitative evaluation with a focus on usability by clinicians is cru-
cial [134]. A next step is to combine seizure video automated analyses with
other investigations including anatomo-electroclinical correlations from stereo-
electroencephalography (SEEG) data [22], which could bring new insights via
multi-modal artificial intelligence approaches [123]. Once sufficiently large and
diverse human datasets are compiled for testing, such analyses could ultimately
refine the power of automatically detected seizure video patterns to correctly
classify seizure type and predict likely cerebral localisation.
--- PAGE 37 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 37
7 Conclusion
Recent advances leveraging deep learning models for the detection and classi-
fication of seizure semiology show great promise. This survey provides insights
from existing works and outlines several challenges and opportunities that will
benefit the field and other medical applications. The proposed pipeline intro-
duces a comprehensive integrated system, aiming to quantify and appropriately
evaluate video recordings of seizures. As the field progresses, the exploration of
multi-sensorymethodologiescapableoflearningacrosssemiology,electricalpat-
terns, and neuroimaging for precise localization emerges as a key challenge for
the neuro-engineering scientific community. While clinical expertise at the indi-
vidualandteamlevelsremainsirreplaceable,theprovisionofmorequantitative,
complementaryevidenceholdsthepotentialtoenhancemedicaldecision-making
and ultimately elevate the standard of care for patients.
References
1. Abbasi,B.,Goldenholz,D.M.:Machinelearningapplicationsinepilepsy.Epilepsia
60(10), 2037–2047 (2019)
2. Achilles,F.,Tombari,F.,Belagiannis,V.,Loesch,A.M.,Noachtar,S.,Navab,N.:
Convolutional neural networks for real-time epileptic seizure detection. Comput
Methods Biomech Biomed Engin: Imaging Vis 6(3), 264–269 (2018)
3. Aghaei,H.,Kiani,M.M.,Aghajan,H.:Epilepticseizuredetectionbasedonvideo
and eeg recordings. In: IEEE Biomed Circuits Syst Conf. pp. 1–4 (2017)
4. Ahmedt-Aristizabal, D., Denman, S., Nguyen, K., Sridharan, S., Dionisio, S.,
Fookes, C.: Understanding patients’ behavior: Vision-based analysis of seizure
disorders. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform 23(6), 2583–2591 (2019)
5. Ahmedt-Aristizabal,D.,Fookes,C.,Denman,S.,Nguyen,K.,Fernando,T.,Srid-
haran, S., Dionisio, S.: A hierarchical multimodal system for motion analysis in
patients with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 87, 46–58 (2018)
6. Ahmedt-Aristizabal,D.,Fookes,C.,Denman,S.,Nguyen,K.,Sridharan,S.,Dion-
isio, S.: Aberrant epileptic seizure identification: A computer vision perspective.
Seizure 65, 65–71 (2019)
7. Ahmedt-Aristizabal,D.,Fookes,C.,Dionisio,S.,Nguyen,K.,Cunha,J.P.S.,Srid-
haran,S.:Automatedanalysisofseizuresemiologyandbrainelectricalactivityin
presurgeryevaluation ofepilepsy: Afocusedsurvey.Epilepsia58(11),1817–1831
(2017)
8. Ahmedt-Aristizabal,D.,Fookes,C.,Nguyen,K.,Denman,S.,Sridharan,S.,Dion-
isio, S.: Deep facial analysis: A new phase i epilepsy evaluation using computer
vision. Epilepsy Behav 82, 17–24 (2018)
9. Ahmedt-Aristizabal, D., Nguyen, K., Denman, S., Sarfraz, M.S., Sridharan, S.,
Dionisio, S., Fookes, C.: Vision-based mouth motion analysis in epilepsy: A 3d
perspective. In: Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. pp. 1625–1629 (2019)
10. Ahmedt-Aristizabal, D., Nguyen, K., Denman, S., Sridharan, S., Dionisio, S.,
Fookes,C.:Deepmotionanalysisforepilepticseizureclassification.In:ConfProc
IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. pp. 3578–3581 (2018)
11. Ahmedt-Aristizabal,D.,Sarfraz,M.S.,Denman,S.,Nguyen,K.,Fookes,C.,Dion-
isio, S., Stiefelhagen, R.: Motion signatures for the analysis of seizure evolution
in epilepsy. In: Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. pp. 2099–2105 (2019)
--- PAGE 38 ---
38 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
12. Alim-Marvasti, A., Romagnoli, G., Dahele, K., Modarres, H., Pérez-García, F.,
Sparks, R., Ourselin, S., Clarkson, M.J., Chowdhury, F., Diehl, B., et al.: Prob-
abilistic landscape of seizure semiology localizing values. Brain Commun 4(3),
fcac130 (2022)
13. Amin, U., Primiani, C.T., MacIver, S., Rivera-Cruz, A., Frontera Jr, A.T., Ben-
badis, S.R.: Value of smartphone videos for diagnosis of seizures: everyone owns
half an epilepsy monitoring unit. Epilepsia 62(9), e135–e139 (2021)
14. Arbabshirani,M.R.,Fornwalt,B.K.,Mongelluzzo,G.J.,Suever,J.D.,Geise,B.D.,
Patel, A.A., Moore, G.J.: Advanced machine learning in action: identification of
intracranialhemorrhageoncomputedtomographyscansoftheheadwithclinical
workflow integration. NPJ Digit Med 1(1), 9 (2018)
15. Arel,I.,Rose,D.C.,Karnowski,T.P.,etal.:Deepmachinelearning-anewfrontier
in artificial intelligence research. IEEE Comput Intell Mag 5(4), 13–18 (2010)
16. ArmandLarsen,S.,Terney,D.,Østerkjerhuus,T.,VindingMerinder,T.,Annala,
K., Knight, A., Beniczky, S.: Automated detection of nocturnal motor seizures
using an audio-video system. Brain Behav 12(9), e2737 (2022)
17. Arnab, A., Dehghani, M., Heigold, G., Sun, C., Lučić, M., Schmid, C.: Vivit: A
video vision transformer. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 6836–6846
(2021)
18. Ataoğlu,E.E.,Yıldırım,İ.,Bilir,E.:Anevaluationoflateralizingsignsinpatients
with temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 47, 115–119 (2015)
19. Avogaro, A., Cunico, F., Rosenhahn, B., Setti, F.: Markerless human pose es-
timation for biomedical applications: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00519
(2023)
20. Bai,Y.,Zou,Q.,Chen,X.,Li,L.,Ding,Z.,Chen,L.:Extremelow-resolutionac-
tionrecognitionwithconfidentspatial-temporalattentiontransfer.IntJComput
Vis 131(6), 1550–1565 (2023)
21. Bao, W., Yu, Q., Kong, Y.: Evidential deep learning for open set action recogni-
tion. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 13349–13358 (2021)
22. Bartolomei,F.,Lagarde,S.,Wendling,F.,McGonigal,A.,Jirsa,V.,Guye,M.,Bé-
nar,C.:Definingepileptogenicnetworks:contributionofseegandsignalanalysis.
Epilepsia 58(7), 1131–1147 (2017)
23. Basnyat, P., Mäkinen, J., Saarinen, J.T., Peltola, J.: Clinical utility of a
video/audio-basedepilepsymonitoringsystemnelli.EpilepsyBehav133,108804
(2022)
24. Bäuerle, A., Jönsson, D., Ropinski, T.: Neural activation patterns (naps): Visual
explainability of learned concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10611 (2022)
25. Beal, J., Kim, E., Tzeng, E., Park, D.H., Zhai, A., Kislyuk, D.: Toward
transformer-based object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09958 (2020)
26. Beddiar, D.R., Nini, B., Sabokrou, M., Hadid, A.: Vision-based human activity
recognition: a survey. Multimed Tools Appl 79(41-42), 30509–30555 (2020)
27. Benbadis,S.R.,Hauser,W.A.:Anestimateoftheprevalenceofpsychogenicnon-
epileptic seizures. Seizure 9(4), 280–281 (2000)
28. Bengio,Y.,Courville,A.,Vincent,P.:Representationlearning:Areviewandnew
perspectives. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 35(8), 1798–1828 (2013)
29. Beniczky, S., Tatum, W.O., Blumenfeld, H., Stefan, H., Mani, J., Maillard, L.,
Fahoum, F., Vinayan, K.P., Mayor, L.C., Vlachou, M., et al.: Seizure semiology:
Ilae glossary of terms and their significance. Epileptic Disord 24(3), 447–495
(2022)
--- PAGE 39 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 39
30. Bertti,P.,Dal-Cól,M.L.C.,Wichert-Ana,L.,Kato,M.,Terra,V.C.,deOliveira,
J.A.C., Velasco, T.R., Sakamoto, A.C., Garcia-Cairasco, N.: The neurobiologi-
cal substrates of behavioral manifestations during temporal lobe seizures: a neu-
roethological and ictal spect correlation study. Epilepsy Behav 17(3), 344–353
(2010)
31. Bertti,P.,Tejada,J.,Martins,A.P.P.,Dal-Cól,M.L.C.,Terra,V.C.,deOliveira,
J.A.C., Velasco, T.R., Sakamoto, A.C., Garcia-Cairasco, N.: Looking for com-
plexityinquantitativesemiologyoffrontalandtemporallobeseizuresusingneu-
roethology and graph theory. Epilepsy Behav 38, 81–93 (2014)
32. Bigalke, A., Hansen, L., Diesel, J., Hennigs, C., Rostalski, P., Heinrich, M.P.:
Anatomy-guided domain adaptation for 3d in-bed human pose estimation. Med
Image Anal 89, 102887 (2023)
33. Blume, W.T., Lüders, H.O., Mizrahi, E., Tassinari, C., van Emde Boas, W., En-
gelJr,Ex-officio,J.:Glossaryofdescriptiveterminologyforictalsemiology:report
oftheilaetaskforceonclassificationandterminology.Epilepsia42(9),1212–1218
(2001)
34. Bodini,M.:Areviewoffaciallandmarkextractionin2dimagesandvideosusing
deep learning. Big Data Cogn Comput 3(1), 14 (2019)
35. Bonini,F.,McGonigal,A.,Trébuchon,A.,Gavaret,M.,Bartolomei,F.,Giusiano,
B., Chauvel, P.: Frontal lobe seizures: from clinical semiology to localization.
Epilepsia 55(2), 264–277 (2014)
36. Bulat, A., Tzimiropoulos, G.: How far are we from solving the 2d & 3d face
alignmentproblem?(andadatasetof230,0003dfaciallandmarks).In:ProcIEEE
Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 1021–1030 (2017)
37. Cao,Z.,Simon,T.,Wei,S.E.,Sheikh,Y.:Realtimemulti-person2dposeestima-
tionusingpartaffinityfields.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPatternRecognit.
pp. 7291–7299 (2017)
38. Carion, N., Massa, F., Synnaeve, G., Usunier, N., Kirillov, A., Zagoruyko, S.:
End-to-end object detection with transformers. In: Proc Eur Conf Comput Vis.
pp. 213–229. Springer (2020)
39. doCarmoVilas-Boas,M.,Cunha,J.P.S.:Movementquantificationinneurological
diseases: Methods and applications. IEEE Rev Biomed Eng 9, 15–31 (2016)
40. Carreira, J., Zisserman, A.: Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the
kinetics dataset. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 6299–
6308 (2017)
41. Castro, O., Furtado, M., Tilelli, C., Fernandes, A., Pajolla, G., Garcia-Cairasco,
N.: Comparative neuroanatomical and temporal characterization of fluorojade-
positive neurodegeneration after status epilepticus induced by systemic and in-
trahippocampal pilocarpine in wistar rats. Brain Res 1374, 43–55 (2011)
42. Cen, J., Zhang, S., Wang, X., Pei, Y., Qing, Z., Zhang, Y., Chen, Q.: Enlarging
instance-specificandclass-specificinformationforopen-setactionrecognition.In:
Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 15295–15304 (2023)
43. Chandran,P.,Zoss,G.,Gotardo,P.,Bradley,D.:Continuouslandmarkdetection
with 3d queries. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 16858–
16867 (2023)
44. Chang,X.,Tung,F.,Mori,G.:Learningdiscriminativeprototypeswithdynamic
timewarping.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPatternRecognit.pp.8395–8404
(2021)
45. Chauvel,P.,McGonigal,A.:Emergenceofsemiologyinepilepticseizures.Epilepsy
Behav 38, 94–103 (2014)
--- PAGE 40 ---
40 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
46. Chefer,H.,Gur,S.,Wolf,L.:Transformerinterpretabilitybeyondattentionvisu-
alization. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 782–791 (June
2021)
47. Chen, C.H., Ramanan, D.: 3d human pose estimation= 2d pose estimation+
matching. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 7035–7043
(2017)
48. Chen,W.,Li,Y.,Tian,Z.,Zhang,F.:2dand3dobjectdetectionalgorithmsfrom
images: A survey. Array p. 100305 (2023)
49. Chen,W.,Yu,C.,Tu,C.,Lyu,Z.,Tang,J.,Ou,S.,Fu,Y.,Xue,Z.:Asurveyon
handposeestimationwithwearablesensorsandcomputer-vision-basedmethods.
Sensors 20(4), 1074 (2020)
50. Cheng,W.,Ko,J.H.:Handr2n2:Iterative3dhandposeestimationusingaresidual
recurrent neural network. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 20904–20913
(2023)
51. Chi,S.,Chi,H.g.,Huang,Q.,Ramani,K.:Infogcn++:Learningrepresentationby
predicting the future for online human skeleton-based action recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.10547 (2023)
52. Cho, K., Van Merriënboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F.,
Schwenk, H., Bengio, Y.: Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-
decoderforstatisticalmachinetranslation.arXivpreprintarXiv:1406.1078(2014)
53. Choupina, H.M.P., Rocha, A.P., Fernandes, J.M., Vollmar, C., Noachtar, S.,
Cunha,J.P.S.:Neurokinect3.0:Multi-bed3dvideo-eegsystemforepilepsyclinical
motion monitoring. Stud Health Technol Inform 247, 46–50 (2018)
54. Cunha, J.P.S., Choupina, H.M.P., Rocha, A.P., Fernandes, J.M., Achilles, F.,
Loesch,A.M.,Vollmar,C.,Hartl,E.,Noachtar,S.:Neurokinect:anovellow-cost
3dvideo-eeg system for epileptic seizure motion quantification. PloS one 11(1)
(2016)
55. Dai, J., Wu, J., Saghafi, B., Konrad, J., Ishwar, P.: Towards privacy-preserving
activityrecognitionusingextremelylowtemporalandspatialresolutioncameras.
In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 68–76 (2015)
56. Dal-Cól, M., Terra-Bustamante, V., Velasco, T., Oliveira, J.A.C.d., Sakamoto,
A.C., Garcia-Cairasco, N.: Neuroethology application for the study of human
temporallobeepilepsy:frombasictoappliedsciences.EpilepsyBehav8(1),149–
160 (2006)
57. Dash,D.P.,Kolekar,M.H.,Chakraborty,C.,Khosravi,M.R.:Reviewofmachine
and deep learning techniques in epileptic seizure detection using physiological
signals and sentiment analysis. ACM T Asian Low-Reso (2022)
58. Datta, S.R., Anderson, D.J., Branson, K., Perona, P., Leifer, A.: Computational
neuroethology: a call to action. Neuron 104(1), 11–24 (2019)
59. Ding,G.,Sener,F.,Yao,A.:Temporalactionsegmentation:Ananalysisofmod-
ern techniques. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell (2023)
60. Ding, L., Xu, C.: Weakly-supervised action segmentation with iterative soft
boundary assignment. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp.
6508–6516 (2018)
61. Dissanayake, T., Fernando, T., Denman, S., Ghaemmaghami, H., Sridharan, S.,
Fookes,C.:Domaingeneralizationinbiosignalclassification.IEEETransBiomed
Eng 68(6), 1978–1989 (2020)
62. Donahue, J., Anne Hendricks, L., Guadarrama, S., Rohrbach, M., Venugopalan,
S.,Saenko,K.,Darrell,T.:Long-termrecurrentconvolutionalnetworksforvisual
recognition and description. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit.
pp. 2625–2634 (2015)
--- PAGE 41 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 41
63. Dosovitskiy,A.,Beyer,L.,Kolesnikov,A.,Weissenborn,D.,Zhai,X.,Unterthiner,
T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al.: An image is
worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11929 (2020)
64. Duan,H.,Wang,J.,Chen,K.,Lin,D.:Pyskl:Towardsgoodpracticesforskeleton
action recognition. In: Proc ACM Int Conf Multimedia. pp. 7351–7354 (2022)
65. Duan, H., Zhao, Y., Chen, K., Lin, D., Dai, B.: Revisiting skeleton-based action
recognition. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 2969–2978
(2022)
66. Eguchi,K.,Yaguchi,H.,Nakakubo,S.,Nakajima,M.,Ueda,Y.,Egawa,K.,Shi-
raishi, H., Yabe, I.: Video-based detection of epileptic spasms in west syndrome
using a deep neural network: A pilot case study. J Neurol Sci 449 (2023)
67. Ekman,P.,Friesen,W.V.:Facialactioncodingsystem.EnvironmentalPsychology
& Nonverbal Behavior (1978)
68. Fan,Z.,Liu,J.,Wang,Y.:Adaptivecomputationallyefficientnetworkformonocu-
lar3dhandposeestimation.In:ProcEurConfComputVis.pp.127–144.Springer
(2020)
69. Fang,H.S.,Xie,S.,Tai,Y.W.,Lu,C.:Rmpe:Regionalmulti-personposeestima-
tion. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 2334–2343 (2017)
70. Fang, Z., Leung, H., Choy, C.S.: Spatial temporal gru convnets for vision-based
real time epileptic seizure detection. In: IEEE Int Symp Biomed Imaging. pp.
1026–1029 (2018)
71. Farha, Y.A., Gall, J.: Ms-tcn: Multi-stage temporal convolutional network for
action segmentation. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp.
3575–3584 (2019)
72. Farnebäck,G.:Two-framemotionestimationbasedonpolynomialexpansion.In:
Scand Conf Image Anal. pp. 363–370. Springer (2003)
73. Fayerstein, J., McGonigal, A., Pizzo, F., Bonini, F., Lagarde, S., Braquet, A.,
Trébuchon, A., Carron, R., Scavarda, D., Julia, S., et al.: Quantitative analysis
of hyperkinetic seizures and correlation with seizure onset zone. Epilepsia 61(5),
1019–1026 (2020)
74. Fayyaz,M.,Gall,J.:Sct:Setconstrainedtemporaltransformerforsetsupervised
actionsegmentation.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPatternRecognit.pp.501–
510 (2020)
75. Feichtenhofer, C., Li, Y., He, K., et al.: Masked autoencoders as spatiotemporal
learners. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 35, 35946–35958 (2022)
76. Feng, Y., Wu, F., Shao, X., Wang, Y., Zhou, X.: Joint 3d face reconstruction
and dense alignment with position map regression network. In: Proc Eur Conf
Comput Vis. pp. 534–551 (2018)
77. Fentress, J.C., Stilwell, F.P.: Grammar of a movement sequence in inbred mice.
Nature 244(5410), 52–53 (1973)
78. Ferando,I.,Soss,J.R.,Elder,C.,Shah,V.,LoRusso,G.,Tassi,L.,Tassinari,C.A.,
EngelJr,J.:Handpostureaslocalizingsigninadultfocalepilepticseizures.Ann
Neurol 86(5), 793–800 (2019)
79. Fernando,T.,Gammulle,H.,Denman,S.,Sridharan,S.,Fookes,C.:Deeplearning
for medical anomaly detection–a survey. ACM Comput Surv 54(7), 1–37 (2021)
80. Fisher, R.S., Cross, J.H., French, J.A., Higurashi, N., Hirsch, E., Jansen, F.E.,
Lagae,L.,Moshé,S.L.,Peltola,J.,RouletPerez,E.,etal.:Operationalclassifica-
tion of seizure types by the international league against epilepsy: Position paper
oftheilaecommissionforclassificationandterminology.Epilepsia58(4),522–530
(2017)
--- PAGE 42 ---
42 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
81. Furtado, M., Castro, O., Del Vecchio, F., de Oliveira, J.C., Garcia-Cairasco, N.:
Studyofspontaneousrecurrentseizuresandmorphologicalalterationsafterstatus
epilepticusinducedbyintrahippocampalinjectionofpilocarpine.EpilepsyBehav
20(2), 257–266 (2011)
82. Gammulle, H., Ahmedt-Aristizabal, D., Denman, S., Tychsen-Smith, L., Peters-
son, L., Fookes, C.: Continuous human action recognition for human-machine
interaction: a review. ACM Comput Surv 55(13s), 1–38 (2023)
83. Gammulle, H., Denman, S., Sridharan, S., Fookes, C.: Fine-grained action seg-
mentation using the semi-supervised action gan. Pattern Recognit 98, 107039
(2020)
84. Garção, V.M., Abreu, M., Peralta, A.R., Bentes, C., Fred, A., P. da Silva, H.: A
novel approach to automatic seizure detection using computer vision and inde-
pendent component analysis. Epilepsia (2023)
85. Garcia-Cairasco, N., Sabbatini, R.: Role of the substantia nigra in audiogenic
seizures:aneuroethologicalanalysisintherat.RevBrasPesquiMedBiol16(2),
171–183 (1983)
86. Garcia-Cairasco, N., Doretto, M., Prado, R., Jorge, B., Terra, V., Oliveira, J.:
New insights into behavioral evaluation of audiogenic seizures. a comparison of
two ethological methods. Behav Brain 48(1), 49–56 (1992)
87. Garcia-Cairasco, N., Podolsky-Gondim, G., Tejada, J.: Searching for a paradigm
shiftintheresearchontheepilepsiesandassociatedneuropsychiatriccomorbidi-
ties. from ancient historical knowledge to the challenge of contemporary systems
complexity and emergent functions. Epilepsy Behav 121, 107930 (2021)
88. Garcia-Cairasco, N., Umeoka, E.H., de Oliveira, J.A.C.: The wistar audiogenic
rat (war) strain and its contributions to epileptology and related comorbidities:
history and perspectives. Epilepsy Behav 71, 250–273 (2017)
89. Garcia-Cairasco,N.,Wakamatsu,H.,Oliveira,J.,Gomes,E.,DelBel,E.A.,Mello,
L.: Neuroethological and morphological (neo-timm staining) correlates of limbic
recruitment during the development of audiogenic kindling in seizure susceptible
wistar rats. Epilepsy Res 26(1), 177–192 (1996)
90. Ge, Z., Liu, S., Wang, F., Li, Z., Sun, J.: Yolox: Exceeding yolo series in 2021.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08430 (2021)
91. Geertsema,E.E.,Thijs,R.D.,Gutter,T.,Vledder,B.,Arends,J.B.,Leijten,F.S.,
Visser, G.H., Kalitzin, S.N.: Automated video-based detection of nocturnal con-
vulsive seizures in a residential care setting. Epilepsia 59, 53–60 (2018)
92. Ghadiyaram, D., Tran, D., Mahajan, D.: Large-scale weakly-supervised pre-
training for video action recognition. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern
Recognit. pp. 12046–12055 (2019)
93. Girdhar, R., Carreira, J., Doersch, C., Zisserman, A.: Video action transformer
network. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 244–253 (2019)
94. Girdhar, R., Gkioxari, G., Torresani, L., Paluri, M., Tran, D.: Detect-and-track:
Efficient pose estimation in videos. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern
Recognit. pp. 350–359 (2018)
95. Greff, K., Srivastava, R.K., Koutník, J., Steunebrink, B.R., Schmidhuber, J.:
Lstm:Asearchspaceodyssey.IEEETransNeuralNetwLearnSyst28(10),2222–
2232 (2016)
96. Guo, M.H., Xu, T.X., Liu, J.J., Liu, Z.N., Jiang, P.T., Mu, T.J., Zhang, S.H.,
Martin,R.R.,Cheng,M.M.,Hu,S.M.:Attentionmechanismsincomputervision:
A survey. Comput Vis Media pp. 1–38 (2022)
--- PAGE 43 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 43
97. Harrison, S.M., Cohen, R.C., Cleary, P.W.: Whole-body movement modeling in
realistic environments for understanding performance and injury. In: Digi Hum
Model Med, pp. 709–765. Elsevier (2023)
98. He,K.,Gkioxari,G.,Dollár,P.,Girshick,R.:Maskr-cnn.In:ProcIEEEIntConf
Comput Vis. pp. 2961–2969 (2017)
99. He,K.,Zhang,X.,Ren,S.,Sun,J.:Deepresiduallearningforimagerecognition.
In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 770–778 (2016)
100. Herath, S., Harandi, M., Porikli, F.: Going deeper into action recognition: A
survey. Image Vis Comput 60, 4–21 (2017)
101. Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., Dean, J.: Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 (2015)
102. Hou, J.C., Li, C.J., Chou, C.C., Shih, Y.C., Fong, S.L., Dufau, S.E., Lin, P.T.,
Tsao, Y., McGonigal, A., Yu, H.Y.: Artificial intelligence-based face transforma-
tioninpatientseizurevideosforprivacyprotection.MayoClinProcDigitHealth
1(4), 619–628 (2023)
103. Hou,J.C.,McGonigal,A.,Bartolomei,F.,Thonnat,M.:Amulti-streamapproach
forseizureclassificationwithknowledgedistillation.In:IEEEIntConfAdvVideo
Signal Based Surveill. pp. 1–8 (2021)
104. Hou, J.C., McGonigal, A., Bartolomei, F., Thonnat, M.: A self-supervised pre-
trainingframeworkforvision-basedseizureclassification.In:ProcIEEEIntConf
Acoust Speech Signal Process. pp. 1151–1155 (2022)
105. Hou,J.C.,Thonnat,M.,Bartolomei,F.,McGonigal,A.:Automatedvideoanalysis
of emotion and dystonia in epileptic seizures. Epilepsy Res 184, 106953 (2022)
106. Hou,J.C.,Thonnat,M.,Huys,R.,Bartolomei,F.,McGonigal,A.:Rhythmicrock-
ing stereotypies in frontal lobe seizures: A quantified video study. Neurophysiol
Clin 50(2), 75–80 (2020)
107. Hu,P.,Ramanan,D.:Findingtinyfaces.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPattern
Recognit. pp. 951–959 (2017)
108. Huang, X., Wang, X., Lv, W., Bai, X., Long, X., Deng, K., Dang, Q., Han, S.,
Liu, Q., Hu, X., et al.: Pp-yolov2: A practical object detector. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.10419 (2021)
109. Hukkelås, H., Lindseth, F.: Does image anonymization impact computer vision
training?In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPatternRecognit.pp.140–150(2023)
110. Hyppönen, J., Hakala, A., Annala, K., Zhang, H., Peltola, J., Mervaala, E.,
Kälviäinen, R.: Automatic assessment of the myoclonus severity from videos
recorded according to standardized unified myoclonus rating scale protocol and
using human pose and body movement analysis. Seizure 76, 72–78 (2020)
111. Javeed, A., Dallora, A.L., Berglund, J.S., Ali, A., Ali, L., Anderberg, P.: Ma-
chine learning for dementia prediction: A systematic review and future research
directions. J Med Syst 47(1), 17 (2023)
112. Jegham,I.,Khalifa,A.B.,Alouani,I.,Mahjoub,M.A.:Vision-basedhumanaction
recognition:Anoverviewandrealworldchallenges.ForensicSciIntDigitInvestig
32, 200901 (2020)
113. Ji, S., Xu, W., Yang, M., Yu, K.: 3d convolutional neural networks for human
action recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 35(1), 221–231 (2012)
114. Jiang, H., Learned-Miller, E.: Face detection with the faster r-cnn. In: IEEE Int
Conf Autom Face Gesture Recognit. pp. 650–657 (2017)
115. Jiao, L., Zhang, F., Liu, F., Yang, S., Li, L., Feng, Z., Qu, R.: A survey of deep
learning-based object detection. IEEE access 7, 128837–128868 (2019)
--- PAGE 44 ---
44 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
116. Jin,S.,Su,H.,Stauffer,C.,Learned-Miller,E.:End-to-endfacedetectionandcast
groupinginmoviesusingerdos-renyiclustering.In:ProcIEEEIntConfComput
Vis. pp. 5276–5285 (2017)
117. Kadir, T., Brady, M.: Saliency, scale and image description. Int J Comput Vis
45(2), 83–105 (2001)
118. Kalitzin,S.,Petkov,G.,Velis,D.,Vledder,B.,daSilva,F.L.:Automaticsegmen-
tation of episodes containing epileptic clonic seizures in video sequences. IEEE
Trans Biomed Eng 59(12), 3379–3385 (2012)
119. Karacsony, T., Jeni, L.A., De La Torre Frade, F., Cunha, J.P.S.: Deep learning
methods for single camera based clinical in-bed movement action recognition.
TechRxiv (2023)
120. Karácsony, T., Loesch-Biffar, A.M., Vollmar, C., Noachtar, S., Cunha, J.P.S.: A
deep learning architecture for epileptic seizure classification based on object and
action recognition. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Acoust Speech Signal Process. pp.
4117–4121 (2020)
121. Karácsony, T., Loesch-Biffar, A.M., Vollmar, C., Noachtar, S., Cunha, J.P.S.:
Deepepil:towardsanepileptologist-friendlyaienabledseizureclassificationcloud
system based on deep learning analysis of 3d videos. In: IEEE Int Conf Biomed
Health Inform. pp. 1–5 (2021)
122. Karácsony, T., Loesch-Biffar, A.M., Vollmar, C., Rémi, J., Noachtar, S., Cunha,
J.P.S.: Novel 3d video action recognition deep learning approach for near real
time epileptic seizure classification. Sci Rep 12(1), 19571 (2022)
123. Karimi-Rouzbahani,H.,McGonigal,A.:Generalisabilityofepileptiformpatterns
across time and patients. medRxiv pp. 2023–08 (2023)
124. Ke,W.,Zhang,T.,Huang,Z.,Ye,Q.,Liu,J.,Huang,D.:Multipleanchorlearning
for visual object detection. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit.
pp. 10206–10215 (2020)
125. Kendall, A., Gal, Y.: What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning
for computer vision? Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 30 (2017)
126. Khaleghi,L.,Sepas-Moghaddam,A.,Marshall,J.,Etemad,A.:Multi-viewvideo-
based 3d hand pose estimation. IEEE Trans Artif Intell (2022)
127. Khalid, N., Qayyum, A., Bilal, M., Al-Fuqaha, A., Qadir, J.: Privacy-preserving
artificial intelligence in healthcare: Techniques and applications. Comput Biol
Med p. 106848 (2023)
128. Khan,L.U.,Saad,W.,Han,Z.,Hossain,E.,Hong,C.S.:Federatedlearningforin-
ternetofthings:Recentadvances,taxonomy,andopenchallenges.IEEECommun
Surv Tutorials 23(3), 1759–1799 (2021)
129. KhoKhar,F.A.,Shah,J.H.,Khan,M.A.,Sharif,M.,Tariq,U.,Kadry,S.:Areview
on federated learning towards image processing. Comput Electr Eng 99, 107818
(2022)
130. Kim,M.,Jiang,X.,Lauter,K.,Ismayilzada,E.,Shams,S.:Securehumanaction
recognition by encrypted neural network inference. Nat Commun 13(1), 4799
(2022)
131. Kipf, T.N., Welling, M.: Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 (2016)
132. Knight,A.,Gschwind,T.,Galer,P.,Worrell,G.A.,Litt,B.,Soltesz,I.,Beniczky,
S.: Artificial intelligence in epilepsy phenotyping. Epilepsia (2023)
133. Krakauer, J.W., Ghazanfar, A.A., Gomez-Marin, A., MacIver, M.A., Poeppel,
D.: Neuroscience needs behavior: correcting a reductionist bias. Neuron 93(3),
480–490 (2017)
--- PAGE 45 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 45
134. Kundu,S.:Aiinmedicinemustbeexplainable.NatMed27(8),1328–1328(2021)
135. Lakshminarayanan, B., Pritzel, A., Blundell, C.: Simple and scalable predictive
uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 30
(2017)
136. Lea,C.,Flynn,M.D.,Vidal,R.,Reiter,A.,Hager,G.D.:Temporalconvolutional
networksforactionsegmentationanddetection.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVis
Pattern Recognit. pp. 156–165 (2017)
137. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G.: Deep learning. Nature 521(7553), 436–444
(2015)
138. Lee, T., Tremblay, J., Blukis, V., Wen, B., Lee, B.U., Shin, I., Birchfield, S.,
Kweon,I.S.,Yoon,K.J.:Tta-cope:Test-timeadaptationforcategory-levelobject
pose estimation. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 21285–
21295 (2023)
139. Lennard,S.,Newman,R.,McLean,B.,Jory,C.,Cox,D.,Young,C.,Corson,E.,
Shankar, R.: Improving nocturnal event monitoring in people with intellectual
disability in community using an artificial intelligence camera. Epilepsy Behav
Rep 22, 100603 (2023)
140. Lhatoo, S.D., Bernasconi, N., Blumcke, I., Braun, K., Buchhalter, J., Denaxas,
S.,Galanopoulou,A.,Josephson,C.,Kobow,K.,Lowenstein,D.,etal.:Bigdata
inepilepsy:clinicalandresearchconsiderations.reportfromtheepilepsybigdata
taskforceoftheinternationalleagueagainstepilepsy.Epilepsia61(9),1869–1883
(2020)
141. Li, C., Niu, D., Jiang, B., Zuo, X., Yang, J.: Meta-har: Federated representation
learning for human activity recognition. In: Proc Web Conf 2021. pp. 912–922
(2021)
142. Li, L., Tian, L., Zhang, X., Wang, Q., Zhang, B., Bo, L., Liu, M., Chen, C.:
Renderih:Alarge-scalesyntheticdatasetfor3dinteractinghandposeestimation.
In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 20395–20405 (2023)
143. Li, M., Chen, S., Chen, X., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Tian, Q.: Actional-structural
graphconvolutionalnetworksforskeleton-basedactionrecognition.In:ProcIEEE
Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 3595–3603 (2019)
144. Li, M., Sun, Q.: 3d skeletal human action recognition using a cnn fusion model.
Math Probl Eng 2021, 1–11 (2021)
145. Li, S., Li, W., Cook, C., Gao, Y.: Deep independently recurrent neural network
(indrnn). arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06251 (2019)
146. Li,Y.,Mao,H.,Girshick,R.,He,K.:Exploringplainvisiontransformerbackbones
forobjectdetection.In:ProcEurConfComputVis.pp.280–296.Springer(2022)
147. Li, Y., Tan, G., Gou, C.: Cascaded iterative transformer for jointly predicting
faciallandmark,occlusionprobabilityandheadpose.IntJComputVispp.1–16
(2023)
148. Liu, W., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Szegedy, C., Reed, S., Fu, C.Y., Berg, A.C.:
Ssd: Single shot multibox detector. In: Proc Eur Conf Comput Vis. pp. 21–37.
Springer (2016)
149. Liu, Z., Lin, Y., Cao, Y., Hu, H., Wei, Y., Zhang, Z., Lin, S., Guo, B.: Swin
transformer:Hierarchicalvisiontransformerusingshiftedwindows.In:ProcIEEE
Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 10012–10022 (2021)
150. Loper, M., Mahmood, N., Romero, J., Pons-Moll, G., Black, M.J.: Smpl: A
skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Trans Graph 34(6) (2015)
151. Lu,Z.,Elhamifar,E.:Set-supervisedactionlearninginproceduraltaskvideosvia
pairwise order consistency. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit.
pp. 19903–19913 (2022)
--- PAGE 46 ---
46 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
152. Lüders,H.,Acharya,J.,Baumgartner,C.,Benbadis,S.,Bleasel,A.,Burgess,R.,
Dinner, D., Ebner, A., Foldvary, N., Geller, E., et al.: A new epileptic seizure
classificationbasedexclusivelyonictalsemiology.ActaNeurolScand99(3),137–
141 (1999)
153. Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I.: A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.
Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 30 (2017)
154. Luo,Y.,Ren,J.,Wang,Z.,Sun,W.,Pan,J.,Liu,J.,Pang,J.,Lin,L.:Lstmpose
machines. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 5207–5215
(2018)
155. Van der Maaten, L., Hinton, G.: Visualizing data using t-sne. J Mach Learn Res
9(11) (2008)
156. Mahajan, K., Sharma, M., Vig, L.: Meta-dermdiagnosis: Few-shot skin disease
identification using meta-learning. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern
Recognit. pp. 730–731 (2020)
157. Mai, G., Cao, K., Yuen, P.C., Jain, A.K.: On the reconstruction of face images
fromdeepfacetemplates.IEEETransPatternAnalMachIntell41(5),1188–1202
(2018)
158. Maia, P., Hartl, E., Vollmar, C., Noachtar, S., Cunha, J.P.S.: Epileptic seizure
classification using the neuromov database. In: IEEE Port Meet Bioeng. pp. 1–4
(2019)
159. McGonigal, A., Bartolomei, F., Chauvel, P.: On seizure semiology. Epilepsia
62(9), 2019–2035 (2021)
160. Meher, J., Allende-Cid, H., Nordling, T.E.: A survey and classification of face
alignmentmethodsbasedonfacemodels.arXivpreprintarXiv:2311.03082(2023)
161. Mehta,D.,Sivathamboo,S.,Simpson,H.,Kwan,P.,O’Brien,T.,Ge,Z.:Privacy-
preservingearlydetectionofepilepticseizuresinvideos.In:IntConfMedImage
Comput Comput Assist Interv. pp. 210–219. Springer (2023)
162. Mesquita, I.A., Fonseca, P.F.P.d., Pinheiro, A.R.V., Velhote Correia, M.F.P.,
Silva, C.I.C.d.: Methodological considerations for kinematic analysis of upper
limbs in healthy and poststroke adults Part II: a systematic review of motion
capturesystemsandkinematicmetrics.TopStrokeRehabil26(6),464–472(2019)
163. Monfort, M., Pan, B., Ramakrishnan, K., Andonian, A., McNamara, B.A., Las-
celles,A.,Fan,Q.,Gutfreund,D.,Feris,R.S.,Oliva,A.:Multi-momentsintime:
Learning and interpreting models for multi-action video understanding. IEEE
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 44(12), 9434–9445 (2021)
164. Mora, S., Turrisi, R., Chiarella, L., Tassi, L., Mai, R., Nobili, L., Barla, A., Ar-
nulfo, G.: Nlp-based tools for localization of the epileptogenic zone in patients
with drug-resistant focal epilepsy. bioRxiv pp. 2022–11 (2022)
165. Moro, M., Pastore, V.P., Marchesi, G., Proserpio, P., Tassi, L., Castelnovo, A.,
Manconi,M.,Nobile,G.,Cordani,R.,Gibbs,S.A.,etal.:Automaticvideoanalysis
and classification of sleep-related hypermotor seizures and disorders of arousal.
Epilepsia (2023)
166. Myszczynska, M.A., Ojamies, P.N., Lacoste, A.M., Neil, D., Saffari, A., Mead,
R., Hautbergue, G.M., Holbrook, J.D., Ferraiuolo, L.: Applications of machine
learningtodiagnosisandtreatmentofneurodegenerativediseases.NatRevNeurol
16(8), 440–456 (2020)
167. Nayak,R.,Pati,U.C.,Das,S.K.:Acomprehensivereviewondeeplearning-based
methods for video anomaly detection. Image Vis Comput 106, 104078 (2021)
168. Ngoc, Q.T., Lee, S., Song, B.C.: Facial landmark-based emotion recognition via
directed graph neural network. Electron 9(5), 764 (2020)
--- PAGE 47 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 47
169. Noachtar, S., Peters, A.S.: Semiology of epileptic seizures: a critical review.
Epilepsy Behav 15(1), 2–9 (2009)
170. Ohkawa, T., Furuta, R., Sato, Y.: Efficient annotation and learning for 3d hand
pose estimation: A survey. Int J Comput Vis 131(12), 3193–3206 (2023)
171. Ojanen, P., Kertész, C., Morales, E., Rai, P., Annala, K., Knight, A., Peltola,
J.:Automaticclassificationofhyperkinetic,tonic,andtonic-clonicseizuresusing
unsupervised clustering of video signals. Front Neurol 14 (2023)
172. Pan, B., Cai, H., Huang, D.A., Lee, K.H., Gaidon, A., Adeli, E., Niebles, J.C.:
Spatio-temporal graph for video captioning with knowledge distillation. In: Proc
IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 10870–10879 (2020)
173. Panteleris,P.,Oikonomidis,I.,Argyros,A.:Usingasinglergbframeforrealtime
3d hand pose estimation in the wild. In: IEEE Winter Conf Appl Comput Vis.
pp. 436–445 (2018)
174. Pareek,P.,Thakkar,A.:Asurveyonvideo-basedhumanactionrecognition:recent
updates, datasets, challenges, and applications. Artif Intell Rev 54, 2259–2322
(2021)
175. Pathak,D.,Girshick,R.,Dollár,P.,Darrell,T.,Hariharan,B.:Learningfeatures
by watching objects move. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit.
pp. 2701–2710 (2017)
176. Pavlakos, G., Choutas, V., Ghorbani, N., Bolkart, T., Osman, A.A., Tzionas,
D.,Black,M.J.:Expressivebodycapture:3dhands,face,andbodyfromasingle
image.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPatternRecognit.pp.10975–10985(2019)
177. Pediaditis, M., Tsiknakis, M., Vorgia, P., Kafetzopoulos, D., Danilatou, V., Fo-
tiadis, D.: Vision-based human motion analysis in epilepsy-methods and chal-
lenges. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Inf Technol Appl Biomed. pp. 1–5 (2010)
178. Peltola,J.,Basnyat,P.,ArmandLarsen,S.,Østerkjærhuus,T.,VindingMerinder,
T., Terney, D., Beniczky, S.: Semiautomated classification of nocturnal seizures
using video recordings. Epilepsia (2022)
179. Peltola,T.:Localinterpretablemodel-agnosticexplanationsofbayesianpredictive
models via kullback-leibler projections. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02678 (2018)
180. Pemasiri, A., Ahmedt-Aristizabal, D., Nguyen, K., Sridharan, S., Dionisio, S.,
Fookes,C.:Semanticsegmentationofhandsinmultimodalimages:Aregionnew-
based cnn approach. In: IEEE Int Symp Biomed Imaging. pp. 819–823 (2019)
181. Pérez,J.S.,López,N.M.,delaNuez,A.S.:Robustopticalflowestimation.Image
Process On Line 3, 252–270 (2013)
182. Pérez-García, F., Scott, C., Sparks, R., Diehl, B., Ourselin, S.: Transfer learning
of deep spatiotemporal networks to model arbitrarily long videos of seizures. In:
IntConfMedImageComputComputAssistInterv.pp.334–344.Springer(2021)
183. Pordoy, J., Jones, G., Matoorian, N., Dadashiserej, N., Zolgharni, M.: The open
seizure database facilitating research into non-eeg seizure detection. TechRxiv
(2023)
184. Pothula, P.K., Marisetty, S., Rao, M.: A real-time seizure classification system
using computer vision techniques. In: Proc IEEE Int Syst Conf. pp. 1–6 (2022)
185. Rai, P., Knight, A., Hiillos, M., Morales, E., Terney, D., Larsen, S.A., Østerkjer-
huus,T.,Peltola,J.,Beniczky,S.:Automatedanalysisanddetectionofepileptic
seizures in video recordings using artificial intelligence. Res Square (2023)
186. Ravi,S.,Climent-Pérez,P.,Florez-Revuelta,F.:Areviewonvisualprivacypreser-
vation techniques for active and assisted living. Multimed Tools Appl pp. 1–41
(2023)
187. Rayner, G.: The contribution of cognitive networks to depression in epilepsy.
Epilepsy Curr 17(2), 78–83 (2017)
--- PAGE 48 ---
48 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
188. Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., Sun, J.: Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
detection with region proposal networks. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 28 (2015)
189. Ren,Z.,Lee,Y.J.,Ryoo,M.S.:Learningtoanonymizefacesforprivacypreserving
action detection. In: Proc Eur Conf Comput Vis. pp. 620–636 (2018)
190. Ribeiro,M.T.,Singh,S.,Guestrin,C.:"whyshoulditrustyou?"explainingthe
predictionsofanyclassifier.In:ProcACMSIGKDDIntConfKnowlDiscovData
Min. pp. 1135–1144 (2016)
191. Richard,A.,Kuehne,H.,Gall,J.:Actionsets:Weaklysupervisedactionsegmen-
tation without ordering constraints. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern
Recognit. pp. 5987–5996 (2018)
192. Rong, Y., Shiratori, T., Joo, H.: Frankmocap: A monocular 3d whole-body pose
estimationsystemviaregressionandintegration.In:ProcIEEEIntConfComput
Vis. pp. 1749–1759 (2021)
193. Roy,Y.,Banville,H.,Albuquerque,I.,Gramfort,A.,Falk,T.H.,Faubert,J.:Deep
learning-based electroencephalography analysis: a systematic review. J Neural
Eng 16(5), 051001 (2019)
194. Ryoo, M., Kim, K., Yang, H.: Extreme low resolution activity recognition with
multi-siameseembeddinglearning.In:ProcAAAIConfArtifIntell.vol.32(2018)
195. Sathyanarayana,S.,Satzoda,R.K.,Sathyanarayana,S.,Thambipillai,S.:Vision-
basedpatientmonitoring:acomprehensivereviewofalgorithmsandtechnologies.
J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput 9, 225–251 (2018)
196. Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., Batra, D.:
Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localiza-
tion. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 618–626 (2017)
197. Seneviratne, U., Rajendran, D., Brusco, M., Phan, T.G.: How good are we at
diagnosing seizures based on semiology? Epilepsia 53(4), e63–e66 (2012)
198. Sharma, S., Kumar, V.: 3d face reconstruction in deep learning era: A survey.
Arch Comput Methods Eng 29(5), 3475–3507 (2022)
199. Shi, L., Zhang, Y., Cheng, J., Lu, H.: Two-stream adaptive graph convolutional
networks for skeleton-based action recognition. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis
Pattern Recognit. pp. 12026–12035 (2019)
200. Si,C.,Jing,Y.,Wang,W.,Wang,L.,Tan,T.:Skeleton-basedactionrecognition
with spatial reasoning and temporal stack learning. In: Proc Eur Conf Comput
Vis. pp. 103–118 (2018)
201. Simon, T., Joo, H., Matthews, I., Sheikh, Y.: Hand keypoint detection in single
images using multiview bootstrapping. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern
Recognit. pp. 1145–1153 (2017)
202. Simonyan,K.,Zisserman,A.:Two-streamconvolutionalnetworksforactionrecog-
nition in videos. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 27 (2014)
203. Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A.: Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale
image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014)
204. Singh, A., Chakraborty, O., Varshney, A., Panda, R., Feris, R., Saenko, K., Das,
A.: Semi-supervised action recognition with temporal contrastive learning. In:
Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 10389–10399 (2021)
205. Singh, B., Marks, T.K., Jones, M., Tuzel, O., Shao, M.: A multi-stream bi-
directional recurrent neural network for fine-grained action detection. In: Proc
IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 1961–1970 (2016)
206. Song,J.,Wang,L.,VanGool,L.,Hilliges,O.:Thin-slicingnetwork:Adeepstruc-
turedmodelforposeestimationinvideos.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPat-
tern Recognit. pp. 4220–4229 (2017)
--- PAGE 49 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 49
207. Song, Y.F., Zhang, Z., Shan, C., Wang, L.: Constructing stronger and faster
baselines for skeleton-based action recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach
Intell 45(2), 1474–1488 (2022)
208. Springenberg, J.T., Dosovitskiy, A., Brox, T., Riedmiller, M.: Striving for sim-
plicity: The all convolutional net. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6806 (2014)
209. Stefan, H., Strzelczyk, A., Schmitt, F.C.: Ictal hand signs: Minimal previous at-
tention to these diagnostic indicators. Clin Epileptol pp. 1–6 (2023)
210. Stenum,J.,Cherry-Allen,K.M.,Pyles,C.O.,Reetzke,R.D.,Vignos,M.F.,Roem-
mich, R.T.: Applications of pose estimation in human health and performance
across the lifespan. Sensors 21(21), 7315 (2021)
211. Sun,Z.,Ke,Q.,Rahmani,H.,Bennamoun,M.,Wang,G.,Liu,J.:Humanaction
recognition from various data modalities: A review. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell (2022)
212. Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y., Sermanet, P., Reed, S., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D.,
Vanhoucke, V., Rabinovich, A.: Going deeper with convolutions. In: Proc IEEE
Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 1–9 (2015)
213. Tan, H.: Visualizing global explanations of point cloud dnns. In: IEEE Winter
Conf Appl Comput Vis. pp. 4741–4750 (2023)
214. Tang, J., Liu, Y., Su, Y., An, S.: M2ast: Mlp-mixer-based adaptive spatial-
temporal graph learning for human motion prediction. Res Square (2023)
215. Tang, Z., Qiu, Z., Hao, Y., Hong, R., Yao, T.: 3d human pose estimation with
spatio-temporal criss-cross attention. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern
Recognit. pp. 4790–4799 (2023)
216. Tejada, J., Costa, K.M., Bertti, P., Garcia-Cairasco, N.: The epilepsies: complex
challenges needing complex solutions. Epilepsy Behav 26(3), 212–228 (2013)
217. Tevet,G.,Raab,S.,Gordon,B.,Shafir,Y.,Cohen-Or,D.,Bermano,A.H.:Human
motion diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14916 (2022)
218. Thijs, R.D., Surges, R., O’Brien, T.J., Sander, J.W.: Epilepsy in adults. Lancet
393(10172), 689–701 (2019)
219. Tian, J., Yu, W., Chen, J., Lin, J., Wen, M., Li, Y., Zhong, J., Chen, K., Feng,
X.:Automatedanalysisofseizurebehaviorinvideo:methodsandchallenges.In:
World Symp Artif Intell. pp. 34–37 (2020)
220. Tian,Z.,Li,X.,Zheng,Y.,Chen,Z.,Shi,Z.,Liu,L.,Fei,B.:Graph-convolutional-
network-based interactive prostate segmentation in mr images. Med Phys 47(9),
4164–4176 (2020)
221. Tinbergen, J.: Social behaviour in animals: with special reference to vertebrates.
Springer Science & Business Media (2012)
222. Tran,D.,Wang,H.,Torresani,L.,Ray,J.,LeCun,Y.,Paluri,M.:Acloserlookat
spatiotemporal convolutions for action recognition. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput
Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 6450–6459 (2018)
223. Turaev, S., Al-Dabet, S., Babu, A., Rustamov, Z., Rustamov, J., Zaki, N., Mo-
hamad,M.S.,Loo,C.K.:Reviewandanalysisofpatients’bodylanguagefroman
artificial intelligence perspective. IEEE Access (2023)
224. Ulhaq, A., Akhtar, N., Pogrebna, G., Mian, A.: Vision transformers for action
recognition: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05700 (2022)
225. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N.,
Kaiser,Ł.,Polosukhin,I.:Attentionisallyouneed.AdvNeuralInfProcessSyst
30 (2017)
226. Vilaseca, A., Fonseca, E., Martín, C.A., Seijo-Raposo, I., Abraira, L., Santama-
rina, E., Quintana, M., Álvarez-Sabin, J., Gil-Nagel, A., Toledo, M.: Thumb-up
--- PAGE 50 ---
50 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
sign:Characterizationofanundescribedseizuresemiologicsign.Seizure89,62–64
(2021)
227. Wan, Y., Yu, Z., Wang, Y., Li, X.: Action recognition based on two-stream con-
volutional networks with long-short-term spatiotemporal features. IEEE Access
8, 85284–85293 (2020)
228. Wang, C.Y., Bochkovskiy, A., Liao, H.Y.M.: Scaled-yolov4: Scaling cross stage
partial network. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 13029–
13038 (2021)
229. Wang,L.,Huynh,D.Q.,Koniusz,P.:Acomparativereviewofrecentkinect-based
action recognition algorithms. IEEE Trans Image Process 29, 15–28 (2019)
230. Wang, L., Xiong, Y., Wang, Z., Qiao, Y., Lin, D., Tang, X., Van Gool, L.: Tem-
poral segment networks: Towards good practices for deep action recognition. In:
Proc Eur Conf Comput Vis. pp. 20–36. Springer (2016)
231. Wang,L.,Xiong,Y.,Wang,Z.,Qiao,Y.,Lin,D.,Tang,X.,VanGool,L.:Tempo-
ral segment networks for action recognition in videos. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 41(11), 2740–2755 (2018)
232. Wang, N., Gao, X., Tao, D., Yang, H., Li, X.: Facial feature point detection: A
comprehensive survey. Neurocomput 275, 50–65 (2018)
233. Wang, X., Gao, L., Wang, P., Sun, X., Liu, X.: Two-stream 3-d convnet fusion
for action recognition in videos with arbitrary size and length. IEEE Trans Mul-
timedia 20(3), 634–644 (2017)
234. Wang,Y.,Peng,C.,Liu,Y.:Mask-posecascadedcnnfor2dhandposeestimation
from single color image. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 29(11), 3258–
3268 (2018)
235. Wang, Y., Zhang, X., Yang, T., Sun, J.: Anchor detr: Query design for
transformer-based detector. In: Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell. vol. 36, pp. 2567–
2575 (2022)
236. Wang,Y.,Cheng,Z.,Yi,X.,Kong,Y.,Wang,X.,Xu,X.,Yan,Y.,Yu,C.,Patel,
S.,Shi,Y.:Modelingthetrade-offofprivacypreservationandactivityrecognition
onlow-resolutionimages.In:ProcCHIConfHumFactorsComputSyst.pp.1–15
(2023)
237. Wang, Z., Gao, Z., Wang, L., Li, Z., Wu, G.: Boundary-aware cascade networks
for temporal action segmentation. In: Proc Eur Conf Comput Vis. pp. 34–51.
Springer (2020)
238. Weinreb,C.,Pearl,J.,Lin,S.,Osman,M.A.M.,Zhang,L.,Annapragada,S.,Con-
lin, E., Hoffman, R., Makowska, S., Gillis, W.F., et al.: Keypoint-moseq: parsing
behavior by linking point tracking to pose dynamics. BioRxiv (2023)
239. van Westrhenen, A., Petkov, G., Kalitzin, S.N., Lazeron, R.H., Thijs, R.D.: Au-
tomated video-based detection of nocturnal motor seizures in children. Epilepsia
61, S36–S40 (2020)
240. Wiltschko, A.B., Johnson, M.J., Iurilli, G., Peterson, R.E., Katon, J.M.,
Pashkovski, S.L., Abraira, V.E., Adams, R.P., Datta, S.R.: Mapping sub-second
structure in mouse behavior. Neuron 88(6), 1121–1135 (2015)
241. Wojke, N., Bewley, A., Paulus, D.: Simple online and realtime tracking with a
deepassociationmetric.In: IEEEIntConfImageProcess.pp.3645–3649(2017)
242. Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac, P.,
Rault, T., Louf, R., Funtowicz, M., et al.: Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-
the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771 (2019)
243. Wu, D., Sharma, N., Blumenstein, M.: Recent advances in video-based human
action recognition using deep learning: A review. In: Int Jt Conf Neural Netw.
pp. 2865–2872 (2017)
--- PAGE 51 ---
Deep Learning Approaches for Seizure Video Analysis: A Review 51
244. Wu, W., Hua, Y., Zheng, C., Wu, S., Chen, C., Lu, A.: Skeletonmae: Spatial-
temporalmaskedautoencodersforself-supervisedskeletonactionrecognition.In:
IEEE Int Conf Multimed Expo Workshops. pp. 224–229. IEEE (2023)
245. Wu, Y., Hu, D., Jiang, T., Gao, F., Cao, J.: Multi-modal signal based childhood
rolandic epilepsy detection. In: Int Conf Cogn Syst Inf Process. pp. 495–510.
Springer (2022)
246. Xu, S., Wang, X., Lv, W., Chang, Q., Cui, C., Deng, K., Wang, G., Dang, Q.,
Wei, S., Du, Y., et al.: Pp-yoloe: An evolved version of yolo. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.16250 (2022)
247. Xu, Y., Zhang, J., Zhang, Q., Tao, D.: Vitpose: Simple vision transformer base-
lines for human pose estimation. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 35, 38571–38584
(2022)
248. Xu,Z.,Hong,Z.,Ding,C.,Zhu,Z.,Han,J.,Liu,J.,Ding,E.:Mobilefaceswap:A
lightweight framework for video face swapping. In: Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell.
vol. 36, pp. 2973–2981 (2022)
249. Yan, S., Xiong, X., Arnab, A., Lu, Z., Zhang, M., Sun, C., Schmid, C.: Multi-
viewtransformersforvideorecognition.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPattern
Recognit. pp. 3333–3343 (2022)
250. Yan, S., Xiong, Y., Lin, D.: Spatial temporal graph convolutional networks for
skeleton-basedactionrecognition.In:ProcAAAIConfArtifIntell.vol.32(2018)
251. Yan,Y.,Duffner,S.,Phutane,P.,Berthelier,A.,Blanc,C.,Garcia,C.,Chateau,
T.: 2d wasserstein loss for robust facial landmark detection. Pattern Recognit
116, 107945 (2021)
252. Yang, S., Jiang, L., Liu, Z., Loy, C.C.: Vtoonify: Controllable high-resolution
portrait video style transfer. ACM Trans Graph 41(6), 1–15 (2022)
253. Yang, Y., Sarkis, R.A., El Atrache, R., Loddenkemper, T., Meisel, C.: Video-
based detection of generalized tonic-clonic seizures using deep learning. IEEE J
Biomed Health Inform 25(8), 2997–3008 (2021)
254. Yao,G.,Lei,T.,Zhong,J.:Areviewofconvolutional-neural-network-basedaction
recognition. Pattern Recognit Lett 118, 14–22 (2019)
255. Ye, L., Ye, S.: Deep learning for skeleton-based action recognition. In: J Phys
Conf Ser. vol. 1883, p. 012174. IOP Publishing (2021)
256. Yoo, C.H., Yoo, J.H., Kim, H.W., Han, B.: Pointing gesture recognition via self-
supervisedregularizationforasdscreening.In:ProcIEEEIntConfComputVis.
pp. 3036–3043 (2023)
257. Yuan, Y., Song, J., Iqbal, U., Vahdat, A., Kautz, J.: Physdiff: Physics-guided
human motion diffusion model. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput Vis. pp. 16010–
16021 (2023)
258. Zaidi,S.S.A.,Ansari,M.S.,Aslam,A.,Kanwal,N.,Asghar,M.,Lee,B.:Asurvey
ofmoderndeeplearningbasedobjectdetectionmodels.DigitSignalProcess126,
103514 (2022)
259. Zalta, A., Hou, J.C., Thonnat, M., Bartolomei, F., Morillon, B., McGonigal, A.:
Neural correlates of rhythmic rocking in prefrontal seizures. Neurophysiol Clin
50(5), 331–338 (2020)
260. Zeng, L., Chen, L., Bao, W., Li, Z., Xu, Y., Yuan, J., Kalantari, N.K.: 3d-aware
facial landmark detection via multi-view consistent training on synthetic data.
In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 12747–12758 (2023)
261. Zhang, S., Zheng, T., Chen, Z., Hu, J., Khamis, A., Liu, J., Luo, J.: Ochid-fi:
Occlusion-robust hand pose estimation in 3d via rf-vision. In: Proc IEEE Int
Conf Comput Vis. pp. 15112–15121 (2023)
--- PAGE 52 ---
52 Ahmedt-Aristizabal et al.
262. Zhang, Z., Luo, P., Loy, C.C., Tang, X.: Learning deep representation for face
alignmentwithauxiliaryattributes.IEEETransPatternAnalMachIntell38(5),
918–930 (2015)
263. Zhang, Z.: Microsoft kinect sensor and its effect. IEEE multimedia 19(2), 4–10
(2012)
264. Zhao, C., Du, D., Hoogs, A., Funk, C.: Open set action recognition via multi-
label evidential learning. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp.
22982–22991 (2023)
265. Zhao, W., Wang, W., Tian, Y.: Graformer: Graph-oriented transformer for 3d
pose estimation. In: Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit. pp. 20438–
20447 (2022)
266. Zheng,C.,Zhu,S.,Mendieta,M.,Yang,T.,Chen,C.,Ding,Z.:3dhumanposees-
timationwithspatialandtemporaltransformers.In:ProcIEEEIntConfComput
Vis. pp. 11656–11665 (2021)
267. Zheng, N., Song, X., Su, T., Liu, W., Yan, Y., Nie, L.: Egocentric early action
predictionviaadversarialknowledgedistillation.ACMTransMultimediaComput
Commun Appl 19(2), 1–21 (2023)
268. Zhi,Y.,Tong,Z.,Wang,L.,Wu,G.:Mgsampler:Anexplainablesamplingstrategy
forvideoactionrecognition.In:ProcIEEEIntConfComputVis.pp.1513–1522
(2021)
269. Zhong, C., Hu, L., Zhang, Z., Ye, Y., Xia, S.: Spatio-temporal gating-adjacency
gcnforhumanmotionprediction.In:ProcIEEEConfComputVisPatternRecog-
nit. pp. 6447–6456 (2022)
270. Zhou,J.,Zhang,T.,Hayder,Z.,Petersson,L.,Harandi,M.:Diff3dhpe:Adiffusion
model for 3d human pose estimation. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput Vis. pp.
2092–2102 (2023)
271. Zhou,X.,Huang,Q.,Sun,X.,Xue,X.,Wei,Y.:Towards3dhumanposeestima-
tion in the wild: a weakly-supervised approach. In: Proc IEEE Int Conf Comput
Vis. pp. 398–407 (2017)
272. Zhu, B., Fang, H., Sui, Y., Li, L.: Deepfakes for medical video de-identification:
Privacyprotectionanddiagnosticinformationpreservation.In:ProcAAAIConf
AI Ethics Soc. pp. 414–420 (2020)
273. Zuberi,S.,Patel,N.,MacLeod,S.,Brunklaus,A.,Symonds,J.,Shetty,J.,Heath,
C., McLellan, A., Stone, J., Brink, P., et al.: Multi-centre development of a se-
cure,cloudbased,patienttoclinician,neurologyvideotransfer,classificationand
management syste. Epilepsia pp. 15–16 (2021)